     EN




EN        EN
         EUROPEAN COMMISSION




                                     Brussels, 9 November 2010
                                     SEC(2010) 1327




        COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT



        TURKEY 2010 PROGRESS REPORT


                       accompanying the

         COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION
     TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL

       Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2010-2011



                              EN


                       {COM(2010) 660}




EN                                                               EN
                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     1.      Introduction .................................................................................................................. 4
     1.1.    Preface.......................................................................................................................... 4
     1.2.    Context ......................................................................................................................... 4
     1.3.    Relations between the EU and Turkey......................................................................... 5
     2.      Political criteria ............................................................................................................ 6
     2.1.    Democracy and the rule of law .................................................................................... 6
     2.2.    Human rights and the protection of minorities .......................................................... 16
     2.3.    Regional issues and international obligations ............................................................ 36
     3.      Economic criteria ....................................................................................................... 38
     3.1.    The existence of a functioning market economy ....................................................... 38
     3.2.    The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union
             .................................................................................................................................... 42
     4.      Ability to assume the obligations of membership...................................................... 44
     4.1.    Chapter 1: Free movement of goods .......................................................................... 45
     4.2.    Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers .......................................................... 48
     4.3.    Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services ......................... 48
     4.4.    Chapter 4: Free movement of capital ......................................................................... 49
     4.5.    Chapter 5: Public procurement................................................................................... 50
     4.6.    Chapter 6: Company law............................................................................................ 51
     4.7.    Chapter 7: Intellectual property law........................................................................... 52
     4.8.    Chapter 8: Competition policy ................................................................................... 54
     4.9.    Chapter 9: Financial services ..................................................................................... 55
     4.10.   Chapter 10: Information society and media ............................................................... 56
     4.11.   Chapter 11: Agriculture.............................................................................................. 57
     4.12.   Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy .................................. 59
     4.13.   Chapter 13: Fisheries.................................................................................................. 61
     4.14.   Chapter 14: Transport policy ..................................................................................... 62
     4.15.   Chapter 15: Energy .................................................................................................... 64
     4.16.   Chapter 16: Taxation.................................................................................................. 65
     4.17.   Chapter 17: Economic and monetary union............................................................... 67


EN                                                                      2                                                                              EN
      4.18.        Chapter 18: Statistics.................................................................................................. 68
     4.19.        Chapter 19: Social policy and employment ............................................................... 68
     4.20.        Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy.............................................................. 72
     4.21.        Chapter 21: Trans-European networks....................................................................... 73
     4.22.        Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments .................. 73
     4.23.        Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights ........................................................... 75
     4.24.        Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security ................................................................. 80
     4.25.        Chapter 25: Science and research .............................................................................. 87
     4.26.        Chapter 26: Education and culture............................................................................. 88
     4.27.        Chapter 27: Environment ........................................................................................... 89
     4.28.        Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection............................................................. 91
     4.29.        Chapter 29: Customs Union ....................................................................................... 93
     4.30.        Chapter 30: External relations.................................................................................... 94
     4.31.        Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy...................................................... 95
     4.32.        Chapter 32: Financial control..................................................................................... 97
     4.33.        Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions........................................................ 98

     Statistical Annex ...................................................................................................................... 99




EN                                                                       3                                                                         EN
                          COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

                                          2010 Progress Report



     1.      INTRODUCTION

     1.1.    Preface

     Following the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council in December 1997, the
     Commission has reported regularly to the Council and the Parliament.

     This report on progress made by Turkey in preparing for EU membership largely follows the
     same structure as in previous years. The report:

     – briefly describes the relations between Turkey and the Union;

     – analyses the situation in Turkey in terms of the political criteria for membership;

     – analyses the situation in Turkey on the basis of the economic criteria for membership;

     – reviews Turkey's capacity to assume the obligations of membership, that is, the acquis
       expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation, and the policies of the Union.

     The period covered by this report is from early October 2009 to October 2010. Progress is
     measured on the basis of decisions taken, legislation adopted and measures implemented. As a
     rule, legislation or measures which are under preparation or awaiting Parliamentary approval
     have not been taken into account. This approach ensures equal treatment across all reports and
     permits an objective assessment.

     The report is based on information gathered and analysed by the Commission. In addition,
     many sources have been used, including contributions from the government of Turkey, the
     EU Member States, European Parliament reports1, and information from various international
     and non-governmental organisations.

     The Commission draws detailed conclusions regarding Turkey in its separate communication
     on enlargement2, based on the technical analysis contained in this report.

     1.2.    Context

     The Helsinki European Council of December 1999 granted the status of candidate country to
     Turkey. Accession negotiations with Turkey were opened in October 2005.

     The Association Agreement between Turkey and the then EEC was signed in 1963 and
     entered in force in December 1964. Turkey and the EU formed a customs union in 1995.




     1
            The rapporteur for Turkey is Mrs. Oomen-Ruijten.
     2
            Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2010). COM (2010) 660 of 09.11.2010



EN                                                    4                                               EN
      1.3.    Relations between the EU and Turkey

     Accession negotiations with Turkey continued. During the preparatory analytical phase the
     level of preparedness to start negotiations on individual chapters has been assessed on the
     basis of screening reports. Of a total of 33 screening reports, one has still to be delivered by
     the Commission to the Council whilst nine are being discussed in the Council.

     So far, negotiations have been opened on thirteen chapters (Science and research, Enterprise
     and industry, Statistics, Financial Control, Trans-European Networks, Consumer and health
     protection, Intellectual property law, Company law, Information society and media, Free
     movement of capital, Taxation, Environment and Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary
     policy) one of which (Science and research) was provisionally closed. The December 2006
     Council decision3 remains in force.

     The enhanced political dialogue between the EU and Turkey has continued. Political dialogue
     meetings were held at ministerial level on 26 November 2009 and 13 July 2010. There was
     one political dialogue meeting at political director level on 10 February 2010. These meetings
     focused on the main challenges faced by Turkey in terms of the Copenhagen political criteria
     and reviewed progress being made towards fulfilment of Accession Partnership priorities.
     Foreign policy issues related to regional areas of common interest to the EU and Turkey, such
     as Iraq, Iran, the Middle East and the Caucasus, were also regularly discussed. Economic
     dialogue took place in a bilateral meeting with the Commission and Turkish senior officials in
     February 2010. In addition, the multilateral economic dialogue between the Commission, EU
     Member States and Candidate Countries in the context of the pre-accession fiscal surveillance
     continued, including a meeting at Ministerial level in May in Brussels. Moreover, a number of
     high-level visits from Turkey to the European institutions took place during the reporting
     period.

     The EU-Turkey Customs Union continues to contribute to the enhancement of EU-Turkey
     bilateral trade, which amounted to €80 billion in 2009. Turkey is the EU's seventh biggest
     trading partner while the EU is the biggest trade partner of Turkey. Almost half of Turkey's
     total trade is with the EU while more than two thirds of FDI in Turkey come from the EU.
     However, Turkey maintained and introduced legislation and restrictions that are in violation
     of its commitments under the Customs Union. A number of Turkey’s commitments on
     removing technical barriers to trade such as conformity assessments checks, import and
     export licensing requirements, restrictions on import of goods from third countries in free
     circulation in the EU, State aid, enforcement of intellectual property rights, requirements for
     the registration of new pharmaceutical products and tax discriminatory treatment remain
     unfulfilled. No progress can be reported concerning Turkey's longstanding ban on imports of
     live bovine animals, beef meat and other animal products. Turkey needs to fully implement
     the Customs Union and to remove a large number of obstacles affecting EU products that are
     in free circulation. The EU urged Turkey to remove all remaining restrictions on the free
     movement of goods, including restrictions on means of transport regarding Cyprus, and to
     fully implement the Customs Union.




     3
            The decision sets out that negotiations will not be opened on eight chapters relevant to Turkey's
            restrictions regarding the Republic of Cyprus and no chapter will be provisionally closed until the
            Commission confirms that Turkey has fully implemented the Additional Protocol to the Association
            Agreement.



EN                                                      5                                                         EN
      The EU provides guidance to the authorities on reform priorities through the Accession
     Partnership, adopted in February 2008. Progress on these reform priorities is encouraged and
     monitored through the bodies set up under the Association Agreement. The Association
     Committee met on 27 March 2010, the Association Council on 19 May 2010. Eight sector
     sub-committees have been held since November 2009.

     As regards financial assistance, some €654 million have been earmarked for Turkey from the
     Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (IPA) in 2010. The revised Multi-Annual Indicative
     Planning Document 2011-2013, which provides the strategic multi-annual framework for all
     programmes at national level (covering all five IPA components), has been drafted based on
     input from the Turkish institutions and will be presented to the IPA Management Committee
     in the beginning of 2011. Support will focus on priority areas such as, fundamental rights and
     the rule of law, public administration reform, competitiveness, environment, transport,
     energy, social development and agriculture and rural development. In addition, Turkey is
     benefiting from support for cross-border cooperation and a series of regional and horizontal
     programmes under IPA.

     EU financial support has been provided to civil society development under the Civil Society
     Facility, in particular to enhance civil society organisations´ capacities. Moreover, technical
     assistance was provided to the Turkish administration promoting good practices on support of
     active citizenship. In 2010 funding was also provided to encourage a civil society dialogue
     between Turkey and the EU in the areas of political criteria and media. In addition, Turkey's
     participation in EU programmes and agencies has been co-financed and projects in areas such
     as media, youth, academic institutions, local authorities, cultural organisations/centres and
     civil society organisations have been supported.

     Assistance under IPA is implemented through decentralised management, meaning that
     assistance is managed by the Turkish authorities as a result of an accreditation process carried
     out by the Commission that was completed for IPA components I-IV in 2009. In 2010 the
     main focus has been to start implementation under these components. Turkey needs to
     strengthen its capacity to absorb funds, achieve results and implement in a timely manner
     components I-IV. Moreover, preparations for the conferral of management responsibility
     under the rural development component (V) need to be completed. The supervision by the
     National Authorising Officer needs to address system weaknesses, including monitoring and
     control, and further improve the quality and efficiency of the project and programme cycles.


     2.      POLITICAL CRITERIA

     This section examines progress made by Turkey towards meeting the Copenhagen political
     criteria, which require stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human
     rights and respect for and protection of minorities. It also monitors compliance with
     international obligations, regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations with
     enlargement countries and Member States.

     2.1.    Democracy and the rule of law

     The domestic political agenda has been dominated by the constitutional reform package, the
     government’s democratic opening to address notably the Kurdish issue and the widening
     investigations into alleged coup plans. A confrontational political climate prevailed, marked



EN                                                  6                                                   EN
      by lack of dialogue and spirit of compromise between the main political parties and the
     government and strained relations between key political institutions.

     Further judicial investigations were opened into alleged coup plans prepared by military
     officers. In July, a criminal court in Istanbul accepted the indictment against 196 suspects
     including 19 retired and 28 serving generals and admirals for establishing a structure outside
     the military hierarchy and attempting to overthrow the government and constitutional order.
     The coup plan, referred to as ‘Sledgehammer’, was allegedly prepared in 2003 under the
     auspices of the First Army. Pending the start of the trial on 16 December 2010 all defendants
     are free.

     The trial against the alleged criminal network Ergenekon is continuing and investigations
     have been widened. A total of 270 people, including 116 military officers and 6 journalists,
     were charged with trying to overthrow the government and to instigate armed riots under
     seven separate indictments. The case concerning the 2006 attack on the Council of State,
     which left a senior judge dead, was merged with the Ergenekon case. A coup plan, referred to
     as the ‘cage plan’, dated March 2009, was seized by investigators from Ergenekon suspects.
     The 'cage plan' allegedly aimed at destabilising the country by killing members of non-
     Muslim minorities, Former commanders of the air force, navy and army testified in the case
     and, for the first time, a full general on active duty, the commander of the Third Army, was
     summoned to testify as a member of the Ergenekon network in Erzincan. The investigation
     into the coup plan, referred to as the ‘action plan against reactionarism’ begun in 2009
     continued.

     The time lapse between arrests and the presentation of indictments to the court in these
     investigations fuelled concerns about effective judicial guarantees for all suspects. The length
     of pre-trial detention raises concern.

     In December, the Constitutional Court (CC) ruled unanimously to dissolve the Democratic
     Society Party (DTP) and to ban 37 members from party politics for five years, including two
     Members of Parliament who thereby lost their parliamentary seats. The ruling was a serious
     setback to the government’s efforts at democratic opening. Under Articles 68 and 69 of the
     Constitution and the relevant provisions of the Law on political parties, the party was
     sentenced as a ‘focus of activities against the indivisible integrity of the State’. Former DTP
     Members of Parliament joined the new Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) and created a new
     parliamentary group under the BDP.

     Overall, the investigation into the alleged criminal network Ergenekon and the probe into
     several other coup plans remain an opportunity for Turkey to strengthen confidence in the
     proper functioning of its democratic institutions and the rule of law. However, there are
     concerns as regards judicial guarantees for all suspects. Turkey still needs to align its
     legislation as regards procedure and grounds for closure of political parties with European
     standards.

     Constitution

     The government put forward a number of amendments to the Constitution which were
     adopted by parliament in May and approved in a referendum in September with a majority of
     58% of the votes and high voter turnout (73%). The key provisions of the package change the
     composition of the Constitutional Court and of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors,
     restrict the authority of military courts, allow appeals against expulsion decisions by the



EN                                                  7                                                   EN
      Supreme Military Council to be brought before civilian courts, establish a constitutional base
     for the Ombudsman service, introduce the right to collective bargaining for public servants
     and allow positive discrimination measures in favour of women, children and the elderly.

     The government established an action plan on legislation necessary for the implementation of
     the constitutional amendments, and indicated its intention to consult stakeholders.
     Consultations are also ongoing with the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe for
     those constitutional amendments regarding the judiciary.

     However, one of the key provisions originally included in the package, which would have
     made closure of political parties more difficult, was dropped when it failed to secure sufficient
     votes in parliament.

     The drafting and adoption of the constitutional reforms was not preceded by a consultation
     process involving political parties and civil society.

     The main opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) lodged a petition before the
     Constitutional Court to annul the entire package. The Court ruled against the annulment
     request but amended two provisions relating to the process for appointing members of the
     Constitutional Court and of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors.

     Overall, the constitutional amendments are a step in the right direction. They address a
     number of priorities of the Accession Partnership in the area of the judiciary, fundamental
     rights and public administration. However, broad public consultation involving all political
     parties and civil society, with their full engagement, is needed to strengthen support for
     constitutional reform. The implementation of the amended constitutional provisions through
     legislation, in line with European standards, is key.

     Parliament

     The confrontational political climate between the main political parties continued to slow
     down work on political reforms. The main opposition CHP party elected a new party leader in
     May. Apart from the Law amending the Constitution, parliament passed a limited number of
     laws covering areas related to the Copenhagen political criteria.

     In October, an amendment to the Law on the election of parliamentarians was adopted.
     Accordingly, parliamentary elections will be held every four years instead of every five, in
     line with an amendment to the Constitution adopted earlier in the year.

     In March, the Law on elections and electoral rolls was amended to allow use of languages
     other than Turkish for oral and written publicity material during election campaigns. Further
     changes to the law aimed at ensuring transparency concerning the income and expenses of
     political parties and candidates during campaigns.

     No changes were made to the electoral system. The 10% of the national vote required for
     representation in parliament, which is the highest threshold in any Council of Europe member
     state, remains.

     The scope of parliamentary immunities continues to raise concerns. It is too wide in cases of
     corruption but at the same time it does not adequately protect the expression of non-violent
     opinions. The majority of the DTP/BDP Members of Parliament have been taken to court,
     based on an interpretation of Article 14 of the Constitution in favour of restriction of



EN                                                  8                                                    EN
      immunities when crimes against the ‘integrity of the State’ are concerned (see the chapter on
     Anti-corruption policy).

     No progress has been made on improving parliament’s rules of procedure. Adoption of the
     draft finalised in February 2009 by the Consensus Committee on Rules of Procedure is still
     pending, due to lack of consensus between the political parties.

     Concerns about the administrative capacity of Turkey’s parliament persist in several fields,
     including executive-legislative relations and parliamentary oversight and scrutiny. The
     Turkish Grand National Assembly plays a limited role in the formulation and implementation
     of Turkey’s accession strategy.

     President

     The President continued to play an active conciliatory role promoting dialogue between the
     main political parties and endeavouring to ensure the sound operation of state bodies.
     However, there were concerns expressed concerning the President’s appointments to certain
     key State institutions, in particular the judiciary and universities. The President stated his
     commitment to addressing the Kurdish issues and kept up his active role in foreign policy.

     Government

     In January, a new strategy for Turkey’s accession to the EU was prepared with the aim of
     speeding up the accession negotiations and increasing public awareness and support for
     accession. In this context, on 15 March the Turkish Council of Ministers adopted the 2010-
     2011 action plan outlining legislation to be enacted and studies to be carried out on each
     chapter of the negotiations.

     In February, the Reform Monitoring Group (RMG) – made up of the Minister of Foreign
     Affairs, the State Minister for EU Affairs and Chief Negotiator and the Ministers of Justice
     and of the Interior – met under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister for the first time since
     the group was established in 2003, stating the government’s commitment to the EU accession
     process. The RMG continued to meet regularly in different parts of the country underlining
     the determination of the government to involve the people more closely in the accession
     process.

     Some of the RMG’s recommendations have been put into practice. A sub-committee on
     political affairs, made up of high-level civil servants, has been established to speed up work
     on political reforms. A deputy governor in each province has been designated as the EU
     contact point. Key reforms relevant to the accession process were included in the package of
     amendments to the Constitution.

     The State Minister for EU Affairs and Chief Negotiator further streamlined inter-ministerial
     coordination for the accession negotiations. The minister frequently met civil society
     stakeholders to promote their participation in the accession process.

     However, further changes to the legislation, in particular as regards protection of fundamental
     rights, is necessary. The special legislative procedure for EU reforms in parliament has not
     been adopted, in order to expedite its work related to Turkey’s accession.

     Regarding local government, a delegation from the Council of Europe Congress of Local
     Authorities visited Turkey in May to follow up on recommendations made in 2007.



EN                                                 9                                                   EN
      Transparency, accountability and participatory mechanisms need to be strengthened,
     especially in local government to which further resources and responsibilities have been
     transferred. Strategic plans, performance measures, establishing financial control systems,
     project management, crisis management, environmental management and information
     technology management remain to be established at local level.

     Overall, after a significant slowdown in the reform agenda over the last few years, the
     government put forward a number of key constitutional reforms and specific measures, albeit
     of limited scope. The strained relations between key state bodies are continuing to have a
     negative impact on the smooth functioning of political institutions.

     Public administration

     An inventory of public services was carried out by the government. Specific public service
     standards for procedures, quality, eligibility criteria and complaints were developed. Work on
     providing basic public services on-line (e-government) has continued with a view to
     improving their quality and to increasing transparency and accountability.

     The constitutional reform provides the basis for establishment of an Ombudsman institution.

     The amendments to the Constitution introduced protection of personal data and access to
     information as constitutional rights.

     However, no progress has been made on reforming the civil service system, in particular to
     reduce red tape, to develop regulatory impact assessments (RIA) and to ensure transparency
     and merit-based advancement and appointments, particularly to high-level positions. Also,
     there is a lack of consultation by civil service of relevant stakeholders in the preparation of
     policies and legislation. Enforcement of common standards and uniform implementation of
     the rules across the civil service remain to be achieved.

     With regard to implementation of the public financial management and control (PFMC) law,
     an effective internal audit system, in the form of autonomous units within all State
     institutions, is not yet operational.

     Clear rules for establishing a business company or a corporation to deliver public services by
     municipalities remain to be introduced. Such rules will reduce opportunities for partisan
     employment and public funding without effective control.

     Overall, some progress has been made, in particular towards establishing an Ombudsman
     institution, protection of personal data and access to information. Further efforts are needed,
     in particular on reforming the civil service and implementing the PFMC law. Increased
     political support to the public administration reform is necessary.

     Civilian oversight of security forces

     In February, the government annulled the secret protocol on Security, Public Order and
     Assistance Units (commonly called EMASYA), which allowed military operations to be
     carried out without the consent of civilian authorities. Implementation of the annulment
     decision remains to be completed.
     In February, parliament adopted a law establishing an Under-secretariat for Public Order and
     Security under the Ministry of the Interior to develop policies on counter-terrorism and to



EN                                                 10                                                  EN
      serve as secretariat for the Counter-Terrorism Coordination Board. The law also established
     an Intelligence Assessment Centre to strengthen intelligence-sharing between security
     institutions.
     The constitutional reform limits the jurisdiction of military courts to ‘military service and
     military duties’. Under the new system, crimes against state security, the constitutional order
     and the functioning of this order will be dealt with by civilian courts.

     The amendments to the Constitution opened dismissals of military staff by the Supreme
     Military Council to judicial review. The constitutional provision providing immunity for the
     perpetrators of the 1980 coup d’état was deleted from the Constitution. In addition, the Chief
     of General Staff and the commanders of the army, air force, navy and gendarmerie will be
     tried before a high tribunal for any offences committed in the course of their official duties.

     Progress has been made as regards internal audits, introduced by the public financial
     management and control law, in security institutions following the adoption of a regulation on
     the internal audit and management of movable properties of the armed forces, the national
     intelligence agency and the national policy, in July. The Court of Auditors has launched the
     planning phase for auditing the extra-budgetary Defence Industry Support Fund (SSDF).

     The case against two non-commissioned officers and an informant from the terrorist group
     PKK concerning the bombing of a bookstore in Semdinli4 is still pending. The case is with a
     criminal court in Hakkari further to the decision of the Van military court that the defendants
     should be charged for homicide and that there is no evidence to prove that they committed the
     offence of "Impairing the unity of the state" regulated in article 302 of the Turkish criminal
     code. The military court set the accused free pending trial.

     Implementation of the regulation on the powers of the police and the gendarmerie in urban
     and rural areas has continued. Residential areas in 31 towns with a combined population of
     about one million civilians were transferred from the Gendarmerie to the police, which is
     under civilian control. However, there has been no progress on civilian control over the
     gendarmerie’s law enforcement activities.

     The trial of a serving gendarmerie colonel who was allegedly involved in extra-judicial
     killings in the south-east in the 1990s continued. The proper conduct of this trial is critical for
     the fight against impunity.

     There is a decrease in the number of incidents where the armed forces exerted formal and
     informal influence on political issues beyond their remit. Nonetheless, on some occasions, the
     Chief of General Staff made comments about ongoing court cases and investigations. A
     number of criminal complaints were lodged by citizens and NGOs about such statements.
     However, there was no judicial follow-up. The selective accreditation by the military of
     certain media has continued.

     No change has been made to the Turkish Armed Forces Internal Service Law, which defines
     the duties of the military and contains an article leaving the military wide room for manoeuvre
     to intervene into politics. The Law on the National Security Council provides a broad



     4
            The defendants are accused of the November 2005 bombing that killed one person and injured others in
            the town of Semdinli in Southeast Turkey.



EN                                                      11                                                         EN
      definition of ‘security’, which, depending on interpretation, could cover almost any policy
     field.

     No progress has been made concerning parliamentary oversight of the defence budget or on
     audit of the properties of the armed forces by the Court of Auditors. The Law on the Court of
     Auditors was adopted by the Planning and Budget Committee in May and is awaiting
     approval by the plenary.

     Overall, progress has been made on civilian oversight of security forces. The jurisdiction of
     military courts was limited, the decisions of the Supreme Military Council were opened to
     judicial review and arrangements were made for high-ranking officers to be tried by civilian
     courts. However, senior members of the armed forces have made a number of statements
     going beyond their remit, in particular on judicial issues. No progress was made on
     parliamentary oversight over extra-budgetary military funds.

     Judicial system

     Progress has been made on reforming the judiciary. Implementation of the 2009 judicial
     reform strategy has continued. Some of the central pillars of the strategy were put in place by
     the amendments to the Constitution.

     As regards the independence of the judiciary, the constitutional amendments increased the
     number of full members of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors from seven to twenty-
     two. In addition to representatives of the Court of Cassation and the Council of State, the new
     members include representatives of first instance judges, the Justice Academy, law faculties
     and lawyers. This new membership lays the foundation for making the High Council
     representative of the judiciary as a whole.

     The amendments to the Constitution open to judicial review decisions by the High Council
     dismissing members of the judiciary from the profession. This is a move in the direction of
     establishing an effective remedy against decisions by the High Council. A Secretariat-General
     established under the High Council provides it with professional and secretarial support.
     Previously, professional and secretarial support for the High Council was provided by the
     Ministry of Justice. The High Council appoints judges and prosecutors to this Secretariat. This
     should reduce the opportunities for the executive to interfere with administration of the
     Council.

     Judicial inspectors responsible for evaluating the performance of judges and prosecutors
     henceforth will report to the High Council and no longer to the Ministry of Justice, thus
     giving the High Council a basis for carrying out its work without the risk of political
     interference. However, the minister is still President of the High Council and the investigative
     authority of the High Council is subject to his approval5.

     The Semdinli case is still pending. (See the chapter on Civilian oversight of security forces)
     The dismissal of the civilian prosecutor previously in charge of the case, together with the




     5
            The draft Law on the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors proposed by the Ministry of Justice
            provides that these decisions of the Minister are subject to judicial review.



EN                                                    12                                                      EN
      handling of the case to date, has raised questions about the independence of the High
     Council6.

     With regard to impartiality, constitutional provisions allowing military courts to try civilians
     have been taken out of the Constitution and new provisions explicitly prohibit such trials.
     Cases related to offences against the security of the state, the constitutional order and the
     functioning of this order are to be tried before civilian courts. This followed the annulment by
     the Constitutional Court, in January 2010, of provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code
     allowing civilian courts to try members of the armed forces in cases of organised crime and
     crimes against the state, on the basis that these conflicted with the constitutional provisions at
     the time. The new provisions for trial of such cases by civilian courts are positive.

     Since the adoption of the amendments to the Constitution, the Constitutional Court will be
     made up of seventeen members. Ten will be nominated by the President amongst the
     candidates nominated by the Court of Cassation, the Council of State, the Military Supreme
     Administrative Court, the Military Court of Cassation and the High Education Board, and four
     will be elected directly by the President from among senior administrators, lawyers and
     rapporteur judges of the Constitutional Court. The Parliament elects three members of the
     Constitutional Court from amongst the candidates proposed by the Court of Auditors and the
     Bar Associations. There are three voting rounds in Parliament. In the third voting round the
     candidates are elected by simple majority. No alternate members are envisaged. The
     involvement of the Turkish parliament in the election of Constitutional Court judges brings
     Turkish practice closer to that of EU Member States. However, two of the judges are still
     military judges. As constitutional jurisprudence in a democratic system is a civilian matter,
     the presence of military judges is questionable. In addition, the amended Constitution
     provides that judges should be at least forty-five years of age when elected for a non-
     renewable term of twelve years. This implies that military judges might return to the military
     justice system when their term in the Constitutional Court expires, which could raise
     questions about their impartiality as Constitutional Court judges.

     Senior members of the judiciary and of the military have made statements that could put the
     impartiality of the judiciary at risk in important cases.

     With regard to the efficiency of the judiciary, use of information technology in the judicial
     system has accelerated judicial procedures and facilitated third party access to judicial
     proceedings. The number of judicial staff continued to increase. On 20 September 2010 there
     were a total of 11,394 judges and prosecutors (11,121 judges and prosecutors on 1 May
     2009). Progress has been made as regards juvenile justice. (See the chapter on Children’s
     rights)

     However, the overall number of vacancies for judges and prosecutors remains significant at
     3,299 on 20 September 2010 (3,875 on 1 May 2009). The regional courts of appeal are not
     operational yet. By law, they should have been in operation by June 2007.

     The regional courts of appeal have not been established yet. By law, they should have been in
     operation by June 2007.


     6
            The civilian prosecutor in this case published the indictment in 2006. It included accusations against
            high-ranking military commanders. The General Staff criticised the indictment and urged those bearing
            constitutional responsibility to take action. The High Council of Judges and Prosecutors took the
            dismissal decision in April 2006.



EN                                                       13                                                          EN
      The arrest of the Chief Public Prosecutor of Erzincan on the grounds of involvement in
     alleged organised crime led the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors to revoke the powers
     of the specially authorised public prosecutor who ordered the arrest. Senior members of the
     judiciary made public statements in support of this decision by the High Council. This
     situation created tensions, both within the judiciary and between the High Council and the
     ministry, and raised questions about the ability of the judiciary to conduct a fair trial.

     Investigations in some high-profile cases continued to raise concerns. This points to the need
     to improve the work of the police and the gendarmerie but, also, the working relationship
     between the police and the gendarmerie on the one hand and the judiciary on the other. The
     ECtHR in its Chamber judgement of 14 September 2010 on the case of Dink v. Turkey7
     considered that the Turkish authorities had not done everything that could reasonably have
     been expected of them to prevent Mr Dink’s assassination and that no effective investigation
     had been carried out into the failures which occurred in protecting the life of Mr Dink. There
     had therefore been a violation of Article 2 (right to life). In addition, the Court found a
     violation of Articles 10 (freedom of expression), and 13 (right to an effective remedy) in
     conjunction with Article 2. Turkey indicated that it will not appeal the Chamber's judgement.

     There has been no progress on introduction of a mediation system into civil justice.
     Reconciliation, introduced into the criminal justice system in 2005, is not used effectively.
     Provision of legal aid is inadequate in terms of either its coverage or the quality of services
     provided. The implementation of pre-trial detention is not limited to circumstances where it is
     strictly necessary in the public interest. This adds to the overcrowding in prisons, where more
     than half of the inmates await trial. Judges do not make effective use of the probation system.

     There are concerns about the functioning of the Forensic Medicine Institute. In a number of
     cases the institute gave conflicting reports on the same case at different times. The backlog of
     the institute leads to delays in judicial proceedings.

     A Council of State judgment in 2009 pointed to the overlapping responsibilities for provision
     of in-service training between the Training Department of the Ministry of Justice and the
     Turkish Justice Academy. Pre-service and in-service training both fall under the responsibility
     of the Justice Academy.

     Overall, there has been progress in the area of the judiciary. The adoption of the amendments
     to the Constitution on the composition of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors as well
     as the limitation of the authority of military courts is a positive step. However, the Minister of
     Justice still chairs the High Council and has the last word on investigations. Attention needs
     to be paid to establishing an effective dialogue with all stakeholders and to implementing
     these reforms in accordance with European standards and in an open, transparent and
     inclusive way.

     Anti-corruption policy

     The government adopted a 2010-2014 strategy for enhancing transparency and strengthening
     the fight against corruption in February 2010. A ministerial committee8 was established in
     December 2009 together with an executive board made up of representatives of public


     7
            Applications no. 2668/07, 6102/08, 30079/08, 7072/09 and 7124/09.
     8
            The ministerial committee consists of the Deputy Prime Minister and four ministers (Ministry of
            Justice, Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Labour and Social Security).



EN                                                    14                                                      EN
      institutions, labour unions and the Turkish Union of Chambers and Stock Exchanges (TOBB)
     to form further anti-corruption strategies and to direct and monitor their implementation.

     The strategy aims at developing preventive and repressive measures against corruption and
     improving public governance by introducing more transparency, accountability and reliability
     in the public administration.

     An action plan setting the timetables for adoption and implementation of each measure was
     approved by the ministerial committee in April 2010. Effective implementation could
     contribute to changing behaviour of public administration, so that it promotes and protects
     integrity and reduces opportunities for corrupt practices. However, participation by civil
     society and its role on the executive board and in implementation of the strategy need to be
     strengthened.

     By June 2010, Turkey had implemented 15 of the 21 recommendations in the 2005 evaluation
     reports by the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO). The GRECO report suggests
     further efforts, in particular to broaden the representation of the anti-corruption oversight
     body, to enhance the independence of the judiciary and, to reform the system of immunities
     and to finally establish the Ombudsman institution. The constitutional amendments provide
     the basis for progress on enhancing the independence of the judiciary and an Ombudsman
     institution.

     In December 2009, the Prime Ministerial Inspection Board was appointed as the counterpart
     of the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and was given the task of Anti-Fraud
     Coordination Structure (AFCOS) responsible for investigation of irregularities in the context
     of financial cooperation between the EU and Turkey. (See Chapter 32 – Financial control)

     In February 2010, the Constitutional Court annulled the provisions of the Law on the Council
     of Ethics regarding publication of the names of civil servants who violate the code of ethics,
     on the grounds that publishing names without a judicial decision would jeopardise the
     presumption of innocence. Ethics training has continued and around 7,000 civil servants
     working for central and local governments have been trained between October 2009 and
     September 2010. In September, the Government adopted a regulation on the code of ethics
     with which investigators and auditors should comply while doing their jobs. However, no
     progress has been made on extending ethics rules to academics, military personnel and the
     judiciary.

     No progress has been made on limiting the immunities of Members of Parliament concerning
     corruption-related offences.

     Further measures are needed to complete the existing legislation and ensure its effective
     implementation to increase transparency on the financing of political parties and election
     campaigns. More resources are also required in order to better detect illegal practice, in
     particular to extend the current monitoring mechanism to election campaign funding of parties
     and candidates.

     For the first time, a mayor of a metropolitan municipality (Adana) was suspended from
     mayoral duties on March 2010 by the Ministry of Interior because of serious corruption
     allegations. Administrative and judicial investigations are continuing.




EN                                                15                                                  EN
      The investigation begun in 2009 into the charity association Deniz Feneri concerning a fraud
     case in Germany is continuing. The police made searches on the premises of the association
     and at the homes of the suspects. However, no indictment has been submitted to court yet.

     The draft law on the Turkish Court of Auditors, which envisages strengthening the Court and
     extending its mandate, was adopted by the Planning and Budget Committee of the Parliament
     in May and is awaiting approval by the plenary. (See Chapter 23 - Judiciary and fundamental
     rights)

     Overall, progress has been made as regards the development of a comprehensive anti-
     corruption strategy and action plan and of a body to oversee and monitor its implementation,
     thus addressing Accession Partnership priorities. However, effective implementation of the
     strategy is necessary to reduce corruption which remains prevalent in many areas. Turkey
     needs to develop a track record of investigations, indictments, and convictions.

     2.2.    Human rights and the protection of minorities

     Observance of international human rights law

     As for ratification of human rights instruments, ratification of the Optional Protocol to the UN
     Convention against Torture (OPCAT) is still pending before parliament. Turkey has not
     ratified three additional Protocols to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)9.

     The number of rulings of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) finding that Turkey
     has violated the ECHR continued to increase. During the reporting period the court delivered
     a total of 553 judgements finding that Turkey had violated the ECHR. The number of new
     applications to the ECtHR went up for the fourth consecutive year. Since October 2009, a
     total of 5,728 new applications were made to the ECtHR. The majority of them concern the
     right to a fair trial and protection of property rights. As of September 2010, 16,093 cases were
     pending before the ECtHR regarding Turkey. The amendment to the Constitution introducing
     the right to submit individual applications to the Constitutional Court is an important step to
     reduce the number of applications to the ECtHR.

     Turkey has abided by the majority of ECtHR rulings, including payment of compensation
     totalling €6.1 million in 2009. Amendments to the Law on enforcement of judgments address
     shortcomings in the judicial process that were identified in several ECtHR rulings against
     Turkey. However, some rulings have not been followed up by Turkey for several years10. The
     government’s announcement that it would address these issues was not followed by action.

     In the Cyprus v. Turkey case, the issue of missing persons and restrictions on the property
     rights of Greek Cypriots living permanently in the northern part of Cyprus remains pending.
     At a meeting in September 2010, the Committee of Ministers decided to postpone
     examination of these issues until December 2010. In its Grand Chamber Decision of 5 March


     9
            Protocols 4, 7 and 12.
     10
            The non-implementation of the Hulki Güneş, Göçmen and Söylemez judgments has resulted in
            deprivation of liberty for the defendants for several years without due process of law. A legislative
            amendment is required to remedy this situation. Furthermore, Turkey has not adopted legal measures to
            prevent repetitive prosecution and conviction of conscientious objectors. Other issues awaiting
            legislative measures by Turkey concern control of the activities of security forces, effective remedies
            against abuse, restrictions on freedom of expression and excessive length of pre-trial detention.



EN                                                       16                                                           EN
      2010 on the Demopoulos v. Turkey case the ECtHR concluded that, for the purposes of the
     ECHR, remedies available may be regarded as effective and accessible domestic remedies
     which have to be exhausted before applications before the ECtHR can be found admissible.
     However, the court stressed that this decision was not to be interpreted as requiring applicants
     to make use of the Immovable Property Commission procedure. Applicants could choose not
     to do so and await a political solution. Since March the number of applications to the
     Immovable Property Commission has increased substantially.

     Regarding promotion and enforcement of human rights, the government plans the
     establishment of several human rights institutions. In particular, the draft law on the
     establishment of the Turkish Independent Human Rights Institution was submitted to
     parliament in February 2010. Opinions from NGOs were discussed by the relevant
     parliamentary sub-committee. The draft law before parliament needs to be amended to bring it
     into line with the UN framework, in particular as regards the independence and functional
     autonomy of this new institution. It is important to conduct this process in close consultation
     with NGOs.

     The constitutional reform provides the basis for establishment of an Ombudsman institution.

     Human rights training for public officials, judges, public prosecutors and police officers
     continued. In-service and on-the-job training for the gendarmerie includes training on human
     rights together with specialist training on techniques for reviewing allegations of human rights
     violations.

     The Human Rights Investigation Committee of the Parliament published 13 reports. However,
     the Committee has been focussing on policy making and the legislative process.

     Human rights defenders have continued to face criminal proceedings. Investigations carried
     out as part of the fight against terrorism have raised concerns following the arrests of trade
     union and human rights activists. The wide definition of terrorism under the Anti-Terror Law
     remains a cause for concern (See the chapter on the Situation in the south-east).

     Human rights institutions lack resources, independence and impact.

     Overall, some progress was made on observance of international human rights law. However,
     a number of reforms have been outstanding for several years. Legislation on human rights'
     institutions needs to be brought fully in line with UN principles.

     Civil and political rights

     The government pursued its efforts to ensure compliance with legal safeguards to prevent
     torture and ill-treatment. This policy has continued to produce positive results. Training for
     health personnel, judges and prosecutors on effective investigation and documentation of
     torture and ill-treatment cases continued with a view to implementation of the Istanbul
     Protocol11 in Turkey.




     11
            Istanbul Protocol: Manual on the effective investigation and documentation of torture and other cruel,
            inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, submitted to the United Nations Commissioner for
            Human Rights, 9 August 1999.



EN                                                       17                                                          EN
      The draft Law on the Establishment of a Monitoring Commission on Security Forces was
     submitted to the Parliament in October. The draft foresees the establishment of a Supervisory
     Commission for the registration and monitoring of disciplinary procedures and measures
     against law enforcement officers.

     However, disproportionate use of force by law enforcement bodies continued. Reports to
     NGOs of disproportionate use of firearms by security forces resulting in death have increased.

     Ratification of OPCAT has been pending since 2005. (See the chapter on Observance of
     international human rights law)

     Law enforcement bodies frequently launch cases against persons who allege torture or ill-
     treatment. Such legal proceedings may deter complaints. In many instances these cases are
     given priority by Turkish courts.

     No forensic doctors are recognised by courts, apart from the Forensic Medicine Council,
     which is under the Ministry of Justice. Law enforcement officers are sometimes present
     during medical examination of prisoners.

     As regards the fight against impunity, the case concerning the death in detention of Engin
     Çeber12 was brought to conclusion in June 2010. The court sentenced three prison guards and
     the deputy director of the prison to life in prison for murder. Two police officers received 7.5
     year prison sentences and one police officer received 2.5 year in prison. This is the first
     verdict where a court has convicted a senior prison official. However, the efforts to fight
     impunity for human rights violations have not sufficiently addressed the backlog of judicial
     proceedings. The ECtHR found that the criminal proceedings were still not finalised as
     regards members of the security forces who took part in an operation at Diyarbakir prison on
     24 September 1996, which had led to the death of eight prisoners and injured six. The ECtHR
     condemned Turkey, on several accounts including the lack of an effective investigation into
     this case (article 3 of the ECHR). In 2009 the Human Rights Committee of the TGNA found
     that very few lawsuits filed against police officers for ill-treatment or torture resulted in a
     conviction13. Administrative investigations into allegations of torture or ill-treatment are still
     carried out by fellow police officers.

     Overall, the positive trend on prevention of torture and ill-treatment continued. Some high-
     profile cases of human rights violations have resulted in convictions. However,
     disproportionate use of force by law enforcement authorities continued and is of concern. The
     efforts to fight impunity for human rights violations have not sufficiently addressed the
     backlog of judicial proceedings.

     There has been some improvement in access to justice in rural areas. However, access to free
     legal aid was limited, especially in the south-east. The Istanbul bar boycotted the legal aid


     12
            Engin Çeber was arrested for distributing a legal journal on 28 September 2008. Çeber died as a result
            of injuries sustained during torture in a police station in Istanbul and Metris prison on 10 October 2008.
     13
            The Human Rights Investigation Committee noted that none of the 35 lawsuits filed against 431
            members of the Istanbul police for ill-treatment or torture resulted in a conviction. The committee
            concluded that this gives rise to suspicions about the effectiveness of proceedings initiated against law
            enforcement agents. According to the same report, only 2% of police officers accused of ill-treatment or
            torture are subject to disciplinary sanctions as a result of an administrative investigation into allegations
            of torture or ill-treatment. The committee concluded that such investigations should not be carried out
            by fellow police officers.



EN                                                          18                                                              EN
      scheme from June 2009 to March 2010 and no legal counsel was appointed during that period
     at Istanbul courts. There is evidence that a large number of prison inmates have never
     received any legal aid or knew that they could benefit from the services of a legal counsel had
     they requested one. There is no monitoring of implementation of the relevant legislation in
     terms of either its coverage or the quality of services provided by legal aid lawyers. Hence,
     there is no assessment of whether the funds available and fees charged are adequate. In
     addition, there is no body, either independent or within the government, responsible for
     monitoring this issue.

     Overall, little progress has been made. Provision of legal aid is inadequate in terms of either
     its coverage or the quality of services provided. There is no effective monitoring mechanism
     that would ensure that problems are addressed.

     The prison reform programme continued. The four training centres organised courses for
     8249 prison staff in 2009 and an additional 4929 staff have been appointed.

     Use of languages other than Turkish in prisons was extended. If the prisoner or his visitor
     does not know Turkish, use of another language is allowed. The Law on enforcement courts
     strengthens defendant's rights in case of the application of disciplinary sanctions against
     prisoners.

     The Ministry of Justice is developing a case management model to be brought into operation
     for juveniles first and then extended to all prisons. This improves rehabilitation services.

     Architectural changes to some high-security prisons enabled more communal activities to be
     carried out. The Ministry of Justice has started to build juvenile prisons.

     However, the high proportion of prisoners in pre-trial detention is still a significant problem.
     Close to half of those imprisoned in Turkey are either awaiting trial or awaiting a final verdict
     on their cases14. The situation is even more worrying as regards juveniles in penitentiaries.
     Only 12% are serving prison sentences, the rest are awaiting trial.

     The number of juvenile reformatories is insufficient. Children are not fully separated from
     adults in all prisons. This is especially the case with girls, who are usually imprisoned with
     women.

     The inadequate resources of prisons continue to raise concerns. The rapid increase in the
     number of inmates, which has doubled in a few years, led to a growing overcrowding
     problem. The number of prison staff and their qualifications are still inadequate. There are
     7981 vacancies.

     The standards of monitoring of national prisons have not been improved to UN standards.

     The inadequate health services for prisoners remain a concern. The protocol signed between
     the Ministries of Justice and Health in April 2009 transferring responsibility for health care
     services in prisons to the Ministry of Health has had limited impact. The number of
     permanent physicians is insufficient.



     14
            Currently there are 119,145 people in prisons in Turkey, 56.557of whom have not yet been sentenced,
            according to Ministry of Justice statistics.



EN                                                     19                                                         EN
      Overall, the implementation of the prison reform programme continues. However, the high
     proportion of prisoners in pre-trial detention remains one of the most significant problems.
     Health services in prisons need to be improved.

     As regards freedom of expression, an increasingly open and free debate continued on a wide
     scale in the media and public on topics perceived as sensitive, such as the Kurdish issue,
     minority rights, the Armenian issue and the role of the military.

     There are few cases initiated on the basis of Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code (TCC),
     after it was amended in May 200815.

     However, a high number of violations of freedom of expression by Turkey are still being
     submitted to the ECtHR.

     Defamation is a criminal offence under Turkish law. Article 125 of the TCC provides that
     defamation is punishable by either a prison sentence or a fine. There are many ongoing cases
     and convictions under this provision. Insults against the Turkish nation are still criminalised
     under Article 301 of the TCC. Other provisions of the TCC16, the Anti-Terror Law and the
     Press Law are also used to restrict freedom of expression.

     The high number of cases initiated against journalists who have reported on the Ergenekon
     case is a cause for concern17. They face prosecutions and trials for violating the principle of
     confidentiality of an ongoing judicial process. This could result in self-censorship.

     Pressure on newspapers discussing the Kurdish question or publishing in Kurdish increased.
     In the course of the year, publication of the Azadiya Welat newspaper in Diyarbakır was
     banned several times and its journalists were sentenced in prison under terrorism propaganda
     charges. In its ruling on the Ürper and others v. Turkey case, the ECtHR ruled that Turkey
     should revise Article 6(5) of the Anti-Terror Law.

     The review carried out by the Ministry of Justice on the legal framework on freedom of
     expression was not finalised.

     Regarding hate speech, the Council of Europe18 recommended Turkey to encourage the media
     to develop a code of ethics on respect for religious minorities and to prosecute incitement to
     hatred passed on by the media.




     15
            According to the Ministry of Justice, since the amendment to Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code, a
            decrease in the number of cases opened has been observed. The figures below cover examinations
            concluded between 1 January 2010 and 31 July 2010: 369 files examined, 270 files for which
            permission was denied, 10 files for which permission was granted, 3.57% files for which permission
            was granted
     16
            Examples include offences against public order (Articles 214, 216, 217, 218 and 220 of the TCC), State
            security (Article 305) or the constitutional order (Articles 312 and 314) and obscenity (Article 226). In
            addition, prosecutions and convictions are continuing on the basis of Article 318 of the TCC (on
            discouraging people from military service).
     17
            4,091 investigations have been initiated against journalists for breaches of the confidentiality of
            investigations or attempts to influence a fair trial (Articles 285 and 288 of the Turkish Criminal Code),
            following their reporting on the Ergenekon case.
     18
            CoE Resolution 1704 (2010).



EN                                                        20                                                            EN
      In October, the Court of Cassation ruled that Nobel Prize winner Orhan Pamuk can be sued
     for remarks made in 2005, when he was quoted in a Swiss magazine commenting on the
     Kurdish and Armenian issues.

     The interpretation of certain articles of the broadcasting law and the sanctions imposed on
     broadcasters raised concerns (See Chapter 10 – Information society and media).

     There are frequent website bans, which are disproportionate in scope and duration. Youtube
     was officially inaccessible in Turkey from May 2008 to November 2010, after publication of
     videos which allegedly violated the Law on crimes against Atatürk. Other court cases are still
     ongoing against the video sharing website and other mainstream web portals have been
     banned for several years. Law n°5651 on the Internet limits freedom of expression and
     restricts citizens' right to access information.

     As regards freedom of the press, concerns remain as regards political attacks against the press.
     The court case on the tax fine ordered in 2009 against Dogan Media Group, critical of the
     government, continues. The press exercises self restraint when reporting following the
     initiation of this case.

     Court cases have been opened against journalists about their work by politicians and high-
     level authorities, including military authorities.

     Overall, open and free debate has continued and expanded. However, the high number of
     legal sues against journalists and undue pressure on the media undermine freedom of the press
     in practice. Turkish law does not sufficiently guarantee freedom of expression in line with the
     ECHR and the ECtHR case law. The frequent website bans are a cause for concern.

     As regards freedom of assembly, some positive developments took place. Newroz (the
     Kurdish New Year) and 1 May demonstrations took place peacefully in most places during
     the reporting period. A number of symbolic public events took place on 24 April to mark
     ‘Armenian Genocide Commemoration Day’. The gatherings received police protection where
     necessary.

     However, some demonstrations in the south-east of the country related to the Kurdish issue
     continued to be marred by violence.

     Difficulties with the implementation of the Law on the duties and legal powers of the police,
     adopted in 2007, are still being reported, especially in the south-east.

     Impunity remains a problem for effective judicial and administrative investigations against
     members of the security forces who are involved in excessive use of force (See the chapter on
     Impunity).

     As regards freedom of association, there are a large number of civil society organisations and
     other associations in Turkey.

     The case for closure of the political party DTP confirmed the need for changes to the legal
     framework, including the Constitution. A government proposal to amend the Constitution to
     this end was rejected by parliament in May.

     The Court of Cassation decided at the end of 2009 against the closure of the lesbian, gay,
     bisexual, transgender and transvestite (LGBTT) association Lambda Istanbul. In a similar



EN                                                 21                                                   EN
      case against the LGBTT Black Pink Triangle Association (BPTA), the Izmir Governorate
     launched a new closure case alleging violation of the rules on morality. The court concurred
     with the public prosecutor who had asked for the dismissal of the case.

     The judicial investigation into the Istanbul branch of the Human Rights Association, initiated
     by a complaint by the Istanbul Governorate, is still pending from last year. The closure case
     against the Özgür-Der Association for Freedom of Thought and the Right to Education was
     rejected by the court.

     The ECtHR judgment on the Özbek and others v. Turkey case about the establishment of the
     Kurtuluş Protestant Church Foundation in Ankara found Turkey in violation of Article 11.
     The court ruled that the ability to establish a legal entity in order to act collectively in a field
     of mutual interest was one of the most important aspects of freedom of association.

     The case against the executive members of Diyarbakır Göç-Der, which has been active in the
     area of internal displacement and immigration, ended in closure of the association and is
     under appeal.

     Raising awareness in public institutions and in the public at large about the role played by
     civil society organisations, including in the accession process, continued. The government
     (EU Secretariat-General) organised consultative meetings with civil society representatives on
     the EU accession process.

     However, civil society organisations continue to face disproportionate administrative checks
     and fines. Moreover, the bureaucratic requirements for fund-raising, obtaining public benefit
     status and lack of simplified rules for small or medium-sized associations prevent a more
     enabling environment for associations. More restrictive legislation applies to foreign
     associations.

     Overall, the legal framework on freedom of association is broadly in line with EU standards.
     However, association face difficulties to meet legal requirements and some are subject to
     disproportionate controls. There is no progress on amendment of the legal provisions on the
     closure of political parties. Launching of closure cases against LGBTT associations restrains
     the full exercise of freedom of association. As regards freedom of assembly, there has been
     progress on the ground. However, some demonstrations in the Southeast of the country related
     to the Kurdish issue continued to be marked by police violence.

     Concerning freedom of religion, freedom of worship continues to be generally respected.
     Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew celebrated on 15 August, after almost nine decades, the
     Divine Liturgy of the Dormition of Theotokos at the Soumela monastery in the Black Sea
     province of Trabzon. On 19 September the first religious service since 1915 was held at the
     Armenian Holy Cross church on the Akhdamar island in lake Van.

     The Turkish authorities granted Turkish citizenship to fourteen members of the Greek
     Orthodox clergy. This facilitates the work of the patriarchate and of the Holy Synod.

     The Turkish authorities, including the State Minister for EU Affairs, the EU Secretariat-
     General and relevant line ministries, have had frequent meetings with the religious leaders of
     non-Muslim communities.

     In May 2010, the Prime Minister issued the first circular instructing all relevant authorities to
     pay due attention to the problems of non-Muslim Turkish citizens. The issues covered in the


EN                                                   22                                                     EN
      circular include protecting and maintaining non-Muslim cemeteries, control of which has
     been transferred to municipalities; implementing court decisions in favour of non-Muslim
     community foundations at title-deed registry offices; and launching immediate legal
     proceedings against publications inciting hatred and animosity against non-Muslim
     communities.

     Opening to the Alevi community continued. Seven workshops were held, as initially planned,
     with different social and professional groups and with Alevi representatives.

     Implementation of the Law on foundations of February 2008 proceeded albeit with some
     delays and procedural problems. (See the chapter on the Right to property)

     However, under Article 24 of the Turkish Constitution and Article 12 of the Basic Law on
     national education, religious culture and ethics classes remain compulsory in primary and
     secondary education. The October 2007 ECtHR judgment – which found that these classes
     did not only give a general overview of religions but also provided specific instruction in the
     guiding principles of the Muslim faith and requested Turkey to bring its education system and
     domestic legislation into line with Article 2 of Protocol 1 to the ECHR – has still not been
     implemented.

     Protestant students were obliged to take such religious classes. Jehovah ’s Witness
     communities brought two new administrative court cases against national education
     directorates of provincial governorates after applications for exemption were rejected. Cases
     on the same issue, brought by Jehovah’s Witness families, are pending before the Council of
     State.

     Non-Muslim communities – as organised structures of religious groups – still face problems
     due to lack of legal personality. In March, the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe
     concluded that the fundamental right to freedom of religion, as protected by Article 9 read in
     conjunction with Article 11 of the ECHR, includes the possibility for religious communities
     to obtain legal personality19.

     Restrictions on the training of clergy remain. Turkish legislation does not provide for private
     higher religious education for individual communities and there are no such opportunities in
     the public education system. The Halki (Heybeliada) Greek Orthodox seminary still remains
     closed, although there have been positive statements by senior government officials on the
     possibility of re-opening it. The Armenian Patriarchate’s proposal to open a university
     department for the Armenian language and clergy has been pending for three years now. The
     Syriacs can provide only informal training, outside any officially established schools.

     The Ecumenical Patriarch is not free to use the ecclesiastical title ‘Ecumenical’ on all
     occasions. In March, the Venice Commission concluded that any interference with this right
     would constitute a violation of the autonomy of the Orthodox Church under Article 9 of the
     ECHR.




     19
            The Venice Commission considered that this is important not least to ensure access to courts and
            protection of property rights. It could see no justification, which would be in conformity with the strict
            requirements of Articles 9(2) and 11(2) of the ECHR, for not granting such rights to the non-Muslim
            religious communities.



EN                                                        23                                                             EN
      In June 2007, the Court of Cassation ruled that persons who participate and are elected in
     religious elections held in the patriarchate should be Turkish citizens and be employed in
     Turkey at the time of the elections. However, Turkish and foreign nationals should be treated
     equally as regards their ability to exercise their right to freedom of religion by participating in
     the life of organised religious communities in accordance with the ECHR and the case law of
     the ECtHR.

     Personal documents, such as identity cards, include information on religion, leaving potential
     for discriminatory practices. In January, in the Sinan Isik v. Turkey case the ECtHR decided
     that indication of religion on identity cards was in breach of the Convention.

     Regarding places of worship, non-Muslim religious communities report frequent
     discrimination and administrative uncertainty. Applications to authorities for allocation of
     places of worship continued to be refused. Two cases regarding Alevi places of worship (Cem
     houses) have been concluded before the courts, and applications have been refused. In May
     2010, a Cem house applied to the ECtHR after exhausting all other domestic remedies.
     Despite the de facto recognition by some municipal councils of Cem houses as places of
     worship, the overall policy of not recognising them has not changed.

     Protestant and other Churches (e.g. the Kurtuluş and Batıkent Churches in Ankara) have not
     been able to obtain permission for places of worship within the boundaries of their provinces.
     Jehovah’s witnesses had similar problems, as the courts found that their place of worship in
     Mersin violated the zoning law. This case has been taken to the ECtHR. The same religious
     community has a similar case before the courts related to a worship place in Izmir.

     Jehovah’s witnesses face tax claims by the municipalities of Istanbul and Ankara. The
     municipal authorities sent demands for payment of property tax for their places of worship,
     despite their exemption in principle following a Court of Cassation decision recognising their
     religion under Christianity. Several court cases are pending on taxation issues.

     Missionaries are widely perceived as a threat to the integrity of the country and to the Muslim
     religion. A court case against two missionaries in Silivri is continuing.

     The court case concerning the killing of three protestants in Malatya in April 2007 continues.
     A police report, prepared at the request of the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office in Istanbul,
     drew attention to the link between the killing of protestants in Malatya and the Ergenekon
     case.

     Judicial proceedings against conscientious objectors on religious grounds continued. Public
     statements on the right to conscientious objection have led to convictions. Implementation of
     ECtHR judgments regarding conscientious objectors is still pending. Turkey has adopted no
     legal measures to prevent repetitive prosecution and conviction of conscientious objectors.
     Several members of the Jehovah’s Witness's community face court cases as conscientious
     objectors. A military court rejected the right to conscientious objection.

     Overall, freedom of worship continues to be generally respected. The implementation of the
     Law on foundations continued, albeit with some delays and procedural problems (see the
     chapter on Property rights). The dialogue with the Alevis and with the non-Muslim religious
     communities continued but has not yet produced results. Announcements on the Halki
     (Heybeliada) seminar were not followed up. Members of minority religions continue to be
     subject to threats by extremists. A legal framework in line with the ECHR has yet to be



EN                                                   24                                                    EN
      established, so that all non-Muslim religious communities and the Alevi community can
     function without undue constraints, including the training of clergy.

     Economic and social rights

     As regards women’s rights and gender equality some progress can be noted. An amendment to
     the Constitution provides that positive discrimination measures in favour of women can be
     adopted. A Prime Ministerial circular was issued with the aim of promoting women’s
     employment and equal opportunities, particularly on the labour market. The circular provides
     for establishment of a national board for monitoring and coordinating matters related to
     women’s employment, for involvement of social partners and NGOs in the work of the board
     and for pursuit of gender equality and gender mainstreaming in drafting and implementing
     legislation and policies.

     The Parliamentary Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men continued its
     work. It conducted a number of investigations, prepared reports and consulted relevant bodies,
     including NGOs on issues such as violence against women, early marriages or sexual
     harassment of minors at school.

     A tripartite protocol was concluded between the Social Services and Child Protection Agency,
     the Directorate-General for Women’s Status and the Turkish national police with the aim of
     improving the services for women and children victims of domestic violence. The police have
     started to use standard reception forms for victims for risk assessment and subsequent
     referrals. Training for police officers continued. Awareness-raising activities for public
     servants continued, particularly at local level.

     The gender gap in primary education continued to narrow and has virtually closed at national
     level20. This needs to be sustained by continuing to encourage enrolment of girls and
     preventing school drop-outs particularly in rural areas.

     However, gender equality and combating violence against women remain major challenges
     for Turkey.

     Women's representation in politics, senior positions in public administration and in trade
     unions21 is very low.

     As regards women's participation in the labour market, the absence of sufficient child-care
     facilities, difficulties in access to secondary and further education and the existence of
     stereotypes all contribute to this. Unpaid work in subsistence agriculture and employment in
     the informal sector continue to be challenges. There are no social inclusion mechanisms for
     women to counter-balance the impact of poverty, migration and other socio-economic
     problems.

     The situation of children, especially of girls, at primary boarding schools needs attention in
     order to avoid drop-outs and increase the quality of education. The safety of minors in these
     institutions, in particular girls, is a cause for concern and was debated in the press. There is a


     20
            The primary school enrolment rates (grades 1 – 8) rose to 98.47% for boys and 97.84% for girls.
     21
            In reply to a parliamentary question in late 2009, State Minister Selma Aliye Kavaf said that 2,282
            managers are employed by State institutions. Of these, 1,995 are male and 287 female. Women thus
            account for only 12.5% of senior State administrators.



EN                                                     25                                                         EN
      need for a transparent and objective review of the system. The gender gap in secondary and
     other levels of education persists.

     School textbooks still contain stereotypes about women’s role and status.

     There is evidence of an increase in honour killings. The number of shelters for women22 and
     other preventive and protective services remains limited. There is no effective government
     oversight of shelters and of the work of municipalities. Inter-institutional cooperation needs to
     be stepped up. Training of law enforcement bodies and public institutions, particularly in the
     field of violence against women, needs to be sustained.

     As regards domestic violence, execution of the ECtHR judgment in the Opuz v. Turkey case is
     pending. Family courts have been applying severe sanctions in cases of domestic violence and
     honour killings. However, this practice needs to be applied consistently. In one honour killing
     case, the Court of Cassation reduced the penalty due to ‘unjust provocation’.

     Early and forced marriages remain a cause for concern. Such marriages could also lead to
     reproductive health risks and domestic abuse. There are no reliable figures on the incidence of
     such marriages.

     Women’s organisations report deterioration in their dialogue and their cooperation with
     relevant public institutions, at both central and local levels.

     Implementation of the national action plan on gender equality and violence against women
     lacks sufficient human and financial resources. The action plan does not contain firm and
     measurable targets. A number of members of the judiciary were trained on gender issues
     under the protocol signed between the Directorate-General for Women's Status and the
     Ministry of Justice. However, additional national resources are required to sustain this
     training. A comprehensive approach to women’s rights has yet to be adopted, with the
     participation of women’s organisations.

     Overall, the legal framework guaranteeing women’s rights and gender equality is broadly in
     place. This framework has been strengthened through the constitutional amendment
     permitting the adoption of positive discrimination measures for women. However, ensuring
     women's rights and gender equality in practice remain key challenges for Turkey. Notably
     sustained further efforts are needed to turn this legal framework into political, social and
     economic reality. Honour killings, early and forced marriages and domestic violence against
     women remain serious problems. Legislation needs to be implemented consistently across the
     country. Further training and awareness-raising on women’s rights and gender equality are
     needed.

     With respect to children’s rights, an amendment to the Constitution stipulates that measures
     to guarantee children’s rights in practice cannot be interpreted as contrary to the principle of
     equality. This would allow adoption of positive discrimination measures for children.

     The pre-school education enrolment rate for children between 4 and 5 years of age increased
     to 39% in 2009-2010 from 33% in 2008-2009. The primary school enrolment rates (grades 1-


     22
            As of October 2010, the number of these shelters is 62, 11 of which were opened in 2010. The 2005
            Law on Municipalities provides, however, for establishment of shelters for women in municipalities
            with a population of 50 00 or more.



EN                                                     26                                                        EN
      8) rose for both boys and girls, virtually closing the gender gap at national level in primary
     education. The Ministry of National Education has developed an early-warning system for
     children at risk of dropping out. In secondary education (grades 9-12), the net enrolment rate
     rose to 65% in 2009-2010 from 59% in 2008-2009.

     The State covers health expenses of children of low-income families and of those who are not
     covered as dependants by the social security system. The family doctor system is gradually
     being extended and covers a larger number of provinces. This could result in better
     monitoring of children's health if sufficient implementation capacity is built up.

     A Department for Disadvantaged Groups was established in the Ministry of Labour and
     Social Security. One of its duties is to coordinate the efforts by institutions to tackle child
     labour.

     Parliament’s Child Rights Monitoring Committee became more active. Among other things, it
     set up an interactive website that allows children to share their views with the members of the
     Committee. Each message is being assessed and replied. However, it is still an informal
     committee and is not responsible for monitoring all proposed legislation for compatibility
     with children’s rights.

     A parliamentary investigation committee on missing children and other cases where children
     are victimised was established. Its report is expected to be debated in parliament in 2010.

     A Prime Ministerial circular was issued with the aim of improving the conditions for seasonal
     migrant agricultural workers and their families, including better access for children to
     education and health services.

     Turkey submitted to the UN its second and third combined state reports on implementation of
     the Convention on the rights of the child.

     As regards juvenile justice, a July 2010 Law amending the Anti-Terror Law and other laws
     provides that children accused of committing terror-related crimes will be tried by juvenile
     courts23. This applies even when such offences are committed together with adults. In
     addition, children sentenced for propaganda for a terrorist organisation or for resistance to
     security officers during participation in meetings or demonstrations will no longer also be
     sentenced for membership of a terrorist organisation. In general, the law provides for non-
     application to juveniles of a number of aggravating circumstances included in the Anti-Terror
     Law. In practice, this is expected significantly to reduce the prison sentences imposed on
     children participating in meetings or demonstrations. Finally, the law allows juvenile courts to
     decide to postpone announcement of a judgment, to convert a prison sentence to alternative
     sanctions or to suspend sentences for terror-related crimes.

     The probation system, although new, has been established in every province and
     psychologists and social workers have been appointed. On 17 September 2010, there were
     6,233 children on probation.


     23
            Under the 2005 Law on child protection, all Turkish citizens up to eighteen years of age are considered
            children and are eligible for children’s rights. However, amendments to the 2006 Anti-Terror Law
            provided that children between fifteen and eighteen years of age can be tried as adults. As a result,
            minors participating in demonstrations, particularly in the south-east, faced charges of ‘membership of a
            terrorist organisation’ and, hence, disproportionate prison sentences.



EN                                                        27                                                            EN
      However, close to 200,000 children – especially girls in some eastern and south-eastern
     provinces – are still out of school. In the case of secondary education, there are large
     geographic variations. There is also a significant gender gap, with net enrolment rates of 68%
     among boys and 62% among girls. Implementation of the strategy for tackling violence in
     educational institutions is limited and needs to be monitored. Some cases of violence and/or
     abuse reported at children’s homes and boarding schools attracted extensive media coverage
     and public criticism. In order to tackle violence against children effectively, stronger
     commitment from, and coordination between, relevant institutions is needed.

     There has been limited progress on preventing child labour. There is still no effective
     monitoring system in place.

     The poverty rate amongst children under 15 years has dropped to 24.4%. Nevertheless, this is
     still 7.3 percentage points higher than the general poverty rate. In rural areas, this rate is as
     high as 44.9%. Special measures are needed to tackle poverty amongst children in rural areas.

     As regards efforts to de-institutionalise the services provided by the Social Services and Child
     Protection Agency (SHÇEK), there is a need for increased counselling, guidance and financial
     support for natural and foster parents. The administrative capacity of the SHÇEK remains
     limited.

     The 2008 demographic and health survey24 shows that 6% of children under the age of five
     were not registered. This rate rises to 11% in eastern regions.

     There has been no progress towards removing the reservations to the main international
     instruments on children’s rights25.

     Children are often still held in prisons and detention centres not reserved for children (or for
     children and young people). In many institutions where children are detained, there is high
     turn over of unqualified personnel.

     The Child Protection Law calls for juvenile courts to be established in all 81 provinces of the
     country. By September 2010, there were ninety five such courts established with only seventy
     two of them functioning covering only 30 provinces.

     Overall, there has been progress with the legal framework on children’s rights, juvenile justice
     and the gender gap in primary education. Nevertheless, efforts on implementation need to be
     further strengthened in all areas, including education, child labour, health, juvenile justice,
     administrative capacity and coordination.

     As regards socially vulnerable persons and/or persons with disabilities, an amendment to the
     Constitution cleared the way for positive discrimination in favour of persons with disabilities
     by stating that special measures for them cannot be regarded as against the equality principle.
     2010 has been declared ‘Accessibility for All Year’. However, the strategy paper on


     24
            2008 Demographic and Health Survey - Final Results: http://www.hips.hacettepe.edu.tr/eng/index.html.
     25
            Turkey ratified the UN Convention on the rights of the child in 1995. However, it has reserved the right
            to interpret and apply Articles 17, 29 and 30 of the Convention - all of which refer to language rights
            and/or cultural identity – in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution of the Republic of
            Turkey and of the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.



EN                                                        28                                                             EN
      accessibility and the related national action plan have not been adopted yet. A national
     mechanism for monitoring implementation of the UN Convention on the rights of disabled
     persons and its optional protocol still has not been established.

     Employment of persons with disabilities in public institutions has been exempted from the
     recruitment limitations in the general budget, paving the way for improving their employment
     prospects. Further measures are needed to increase the employability of persons with
     disabilities in both the public and private sectors, including promotion of alternative methods
     of employment.

     Lack of data and research on persons with disabilities and mentally ill persons remains a
     barrier to informed policymaking.

     Access to education, health, social and public services for persons with disabilities are still
     critical issues, despite legislation in this field. Physical barriers to access to public buildings
     are a particular problem26. Awareness-raising efforts to fight prejudices about people with
     disabilities need to be intensified, with a view to increasing their participation in social and
     economic life.

     Conditions of care for the mentally ill continue to give cause for concern.

     As regards labour and trade unions rights, the amendments to the Constitution grant civil
     servants and other public employees the right to collective bargaining and make disciplinary
     decisions against civil servants subject to judicial review. The bans on politically motivated
     strikes and lockouts, solidarity strikes and lockouts, general strikes and lockouts, occupation
     of work premises, labour go-slows, productivity go-slows and other forms of resistance were
     lifted. Membership of more than one trade union at the same time in the same branch of
     activity was made possible. The Economic and Social Council has gained a constitutional
     basis. A Prime Ministerial circular called for facilitation of exercise of trade union rights in
     the public sector. Marches to celebrate 1 May went peacefully. Taksim Square was opened for
     celebrations for the first time since 1977, when 34 persons were killed and many injured
     during the labour day demonstrations.

     However, trade union rights are not in line with EU standards and ILO conventions. The ILO
     bipartite high-level mission called for the government and social partners, including
     employers' and workers' associations, to seek a consensus and, at the same time, emphasised
     that it is for the government to ensure compliance with international obligations.

     The demonstration by workers from TEKEL (the state monopoly for tobacco processing)
     raised concerns over the labour rights of workers who are to be temporarily employed by the
     State after privatisation.

     Overall, the constitutional amendments broaden trade union rights in the public service.
     However, there are restrictive provisions in the current legal framework which are not in line
     with EU standards and ILO Conventions. Lack of consensus among social partners and the



     26
            The 2005 Turkish Disability Act states that all existing public buildings and roads, pavements,
            pedestrian crossings, open and green areas, sports areas and similar social and cultural infrastructure
            serving the public must be made suitably accessible for disabled people by 2012. However, apart from
            pilot accessibility projects in four municipalities, no progress has been achieved in this field yet.



EN                                                       29                                                           EN
      government is an obstacle to the adoption of new legislation. The constitutional amendment
     package did not introduce the right to strike for civil servants.

     The principle of anti-discrimination is enshrined in the Constitution and upheld in several
     laws. The government consulted civil society organisations, universities and relevant
     authorities on the draft Law for the establishment of an anti-discrimination and equality
     board.

     However, the current legal framework is not adequately aligned with the EU acquis. (See
     Chapter 19 – Social policy and employment) There have been several cases of discrimination
     at the workplace, where LGBTT employees have been fired because of their sexual
     orientation. Provisions of the Turkish Criminal Code on ‘public exhibitionism’ and ‘offences
     against public morality’ are sometimes used to discriminate against LGBTT people. The Law
     on misdemeanours is often used to impose fines against transgender persons.

     The statements by the State Minister responsible for Women and the Family on
     homosexuality being a disorder sparked reactions from the LGBTT community and human
     rights circles. Negative stereotyping by political figures can provoke further discrimination
     against LGBTT people.

     Court cases for the closure of LGBTT associations ended positively during the reporting
     period. (See Freedom of association)

     Homophobia has resulted in physical and sexual violence. The killing of several transsexuals
     and transvestites, along with recent violence by police in Ankara against transgender persons,
     are worrying developments. Courts have applied the principle of ‘unjust provocation’ in
     favour of perpetrators of crimes against transsexuals and transvestites.

     The Turkish armed forces have still a health regulation which defines homosexuality as a
     ‘psychosexual’ illness and declares homosexuals unfit for military service. Conscripts who
     declare their homosexuality have to provide photographic proof. Some have had to undergo
     humiliating medical examinations.

     Overall, efforts continued to improve the situation of socially vulnerable persons and/or
     persons with disabilities, to strengthen labour union rights and to fight discrimination.
     However, in practice many challenges remain to be addressed in these areas.

     With respect to property rights, implementation of the February 2008 Law on foundations
     continued throughout the reporting period, albeit with some delays and procedural problems.
     The initial deadline of 27 August 2009 for submission of applications by non-Muslim
     foundations for the restitution of properties registered under figurative or fictitious names, or
     in the name of the Treasury or of the Directorate-General for Foundations, was extended to
     give the foundations time to obtain all the documents required.

     Representatives of the Turkish authorities met members of non-Muslim foundations a number
     of times about implementation of Provisional Article 7. A total of 1,410 applications for
     restitution were submitted by 107 foundations. To date, 131 positive decisions have been
     given, while another 150 requests were met without taking the cases to the Foundations
     Council.




EN                                                  30                                                   EN
      For 943 applications the Foundations Council extended the period by two months to 16 July
     in order for the files to be completed. On another 347 applications negative decisions were
     issued.

     As regards the Ecumenical Patriarchate v. Turkey27 case and the issue of just satisfaction, the
     ECtHR judgment of 15 June 2010 found that Turkey had to re-register the property in
     question in the land register in the applicant’s name. The Büyükada civil court of first
     instance ruled in favour of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, reflecting the ECtHR's judgement and
     the position of the Foundations Assembly.

     However, the legal framework does not address cases of properties seized and sold to third
     parties or properties of foundations merged before the new legislation was adopted in
     February 2008.

     Syriacs continue to face difficulties in property and land registration procedures. A number of
     court cases are in progress concerning both individuals and religious institutions. The Mor
     Gabriel Syriac Orthodox monastery court cases regarding land ownership continued
     throughout the reporting period.

     Turkey has yet to implement the ECtHR judgment28 of March 2009 on the property rights of a
     Greek Orthodox church on the island of Bozcaada (Tenedos).

     Problems encountered by Greek nationals when inheriting and registering property are still
     being reported, in particular with application by the Turkish authorities of the amended Land
     Registry Law, including interpretation of its provision on reciprocity. With respect to that
     issue, the ECtHR held that there had been a violation of Article 1 of Protocol 1 (peaceful
     enjoyment of possessions) to the ECHR and ordered either the return of the property or
     financial compensation for the applicants.

     Overall, the Law on foundations has been implemented, albeit with some delays and
     procedural problems. The Foundations Council acknowledged these problems and tried to
     speed up procedures. However, this law does not address the issues of properties seized and
     sold to third parties or of properties of foundations merged before the new legislation was
     adopted. Turkey needs to ensure full respect of the property rights of all non-Muslim religious
     communities.

     Respect for and protection of minorities, cultural rights

     The debate on minority-related issues has developed under the auspices of the government,
     and a few symbolic acts have taken place, such as the Roma gathering in March. Work is
     under way to remove discriminatory language from textbooks.

     27
            On 8 July 2008, the ECtHR decided on the claim of the Ecumenical Patriarchate that had been deprived
            of its property acquired in 1902 and dedicated to a specific use in 1903 via the Foundation of the
            Büyükada Greek Orphanage for Boys. The applicant alleged, in particular, that by ordering registration
            of its real estate in the name of the orphanage, under the management of the State Directorate-General
            for Foundations, the domestic courts had breached its right to peaceful enjoyment of its property. The
            court held that the Turkish authorities were not entitled to deprive the owner of its property without
            providing appropriate compensation and that there had been a violation of the ECHR.
     28
            In March 2009, the ECtHR ruled that Turkey had violated the property rights of a Greek Orthodox
            church on the island of Bozcaada (Tenedos). It held unanimously that the refusal by the Turkish courts
            to register the immovable property of the applicant foundation in the land registry in its name was a
            violation of Article 1 of Protocol 1 (peaceful enjoyment of possessions) to the ECHR.



EN                                                       31                                                          EN
      However, Turkey’s approach to minority rights remains restrictive. Turkey is a party to the
     UN International Covenant on civil and political rights, but its reservations regarding the
     rights of minorities and the UN Covenant on economic, social and cultural rights regarding
     the right to education are causes for concern. Turkey has not signed the Council of Europe
     Framework Convention for the protection of national minorities.

     A constructive dialogue between Turkey and the OSCE High Commissioner on National
     Minorities, including on participation by minorities in public life and broadcasting in minority
     languages, would facilitate further alignment with international standards and best practice in
     EU Member States.

     The situation of the Greek minority has not changed. It continues to encounter problems with
     education and property rights, including on the islands of Gökçeada (Imvros) and Bozcaada
     (Tenedos). Management of minority schools, including dual headship29, remains an issue,
     pending an implementing regulation. The schools face procedural and bureaucratic difficulties
     with registration, budget problems and sustainability problems due to the number of students
     (restricted by law on condition that they must be from the same minority) plus administrative
     issues and educational problems.

     Anti-Semitism remains an issue, especially in connection with hate speech in the pro-Islamist
     and ultranationalist media.

     The court case on the murder of Armenian journalist Hrant Dink is continuing without
     significant progress. The court case against two protestants in Silivri is continuing under
     Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code, as allowed by the Ministry of Justice. The Malatya
     murder case continued. The court case against the coup plan, referred to as ‘cage plan’
     targeting non-Muslim minorities started in June. (See Civilian oversight of security forces)

     Overall, Turkey's approach on minorities remains restrictive. Full respect for and protection of
     language, culture and fundamental rights, in accordance with European standards, have yet to
     be fully achieved. Turkey needs to make further efforts to enhance tolerance or promote
     inclusiveness vis-à-vis minorities.

     As regards cultural rights, the Regulation on the Radio and Television Supreme Council
     (RTUK) was amended in November, removing all restrictions on broadcasting in Kurdish and
     other languages by private and public channels at local level. Fourteen radio stations and TV
     channels have been given permission to broadcast in Kurdish and Arabic. Restrictions have
     been lifted. (See Chapter 10)

     For the first time, the Diyarbakır Municipal Theatre staged a play in Kurdish. In June, the
     State Minister for EU Affairs invited all EU embassies to a Kurdish literature event in the
     village of Bahcesehir (Van).

     Mardin Artuklu University established the first Kurdish and Assyrian language departments,
     and started to accept students to post-graduate programmes organised by these departments.

     TRT started broadcasting 24 hours a day in Arabic on the TRT El Turkiye television channel,
     which can be watched via satellite by more than three million viewers.


     29
            The deputy head of these schools is a Muslim representing the Ministry of Education and has more
            powers than the head.



EN                                                    32                                                       EN
      The amended Law on fundamental principles of elections and the electoral registry entered
     into force on 10 April 2010, de facto allowing use of Kurdish in election campaigns.

     However, use of any language other than Turkish in political life is still illegal under the Law
     on elections and political parties. The courts have been issuing contradictory decisions in
     court cases against Kurdish politicians.

     Diyarbakır High Criminal Court No 4 banned 13 members of Bahar Cultural Centre (BKM)
     from performing arts for one year. The court ruled that the 13 artists ‘may not take part in any
     social and artistic events’. Members of the BKM Music and Theatre Group were punished for
     performing at the Batman Cultural Festival, Newroz celebrations and press gatherings. The
     musicians and artists were charged with ‘violating the law on assembly and demonstrations’.
     One musician has been in pre-trial detention. 13 artists and musicians were each given 10-
     month prison sentences.

     In practice, children whose mother tongue is not Turkish cannot learn their mother tongue in
     either private or public schools.

     No measures have been taken to facilitate access to public services for non-speakers of
     Turkish. While interpretation during the investigation phase and court hearing is possible
     under the current legislation for suspects, victims or witnesses, it is not consistently applied in
     practice.

     There have been improvements in use of the Kurdish language in prisons. However, this is
     still restricted because of security concerns and implementation varies between prison
     administrations. (See chapter on Prisons).

     As regards Roma, the government launched an ‘opening’, including a workshop and a
     meeting with the Prime Minister in March.

     The government submitted to parliament a proposal to amend a discriminatory clause in the
     Law on the movement and residence of aliens30, which authorises ‘the Ministry of the Interior
     to expel stateless and non-Turkish gypsies and aliens that are not bound to the Turkish
     culture’.

     In June, the Ministry of the Interior asked all governors about the housing needs of the Roma
     population in each province. It also issued a circular requesting all governors to facilitate the
     registration of all ‘persons without a civil registry’. The registration of Roma is an important
     step to ensure their access to public services.

     However, in the absence of a comprehensive policy to address the situation of Roma, the
     latter still face social exclusion and marginalisation in access to education, discrimination in
     health services, exclusion from job opportunities, difficulties in gaining access to personal
     documentation and exclusion from participation in public affairs and public life.

     The Roma population continues to face socio-economic problems, such as poverty,
     displacement and lack of social services in the aftermath of the demolition in Roma districts
     under urban renewal programmes in various cities. In January, in western Manisa province,



     30
            Law No 5683 on the movement and residence of aliens (Article 21).



EN                                                      33                                                 EN
      several incidents took place between Roma and other citizens, resulting in the displacement of
     Roma citizens.

     Turkey has not been participating in the 2005-2015 ‘Decade of Roma Inclusion’, despite calls
     on the government to do so by the Roma community.

     Overall, Turkey has made progress on cultural rights, especially by further relaxing use of the
     Kurdish language in private TV and radio broadcasts and in prisons. The 24-hour Arabic-
     language TV broadcasts started in 2010 in addition to the Kurdish-language TV channel
     which started the previous year. However, restrictions remain, particularly on use of
     languages other than Turkish in political life, education and contacts with public services. The
     legislation on use of languages other than Turkish is open to restrictive interpretations and
     implementation is inconsistent. There has been some progress in the situation of the Roma, as
     their issues have become more publicly debated, and implementation some measures is
     underway. However, Roma still frequently face discriminatory treatment.

     Situation in the east and south-east

     Implementation of the government’s plan to complete the South-East Anatolia project (GAP)
     by 2012, a key project for socio-economic development of the region, continued. According to
     official statistics, GAP’s share of total public investment increased to 14.4% in 2009 (from
     12% in 2008). Investments on irrigation, road transport, health and education continued along
     with special programmes on business development, human resources development and
     empowerment of women. The first meeting for evaluation of the revived GAP took place in
     February 2010 and a monitoring report for 2009 was published.

     Following the debate on the government’s democratic opening to address notably the Kurdish
     issue, some restrictions on the use of the Kurdish language in broadcasting and the use of
     pasture land in the region have been removed. In a number of cases original place names have
     been restored in response to public demand31.

     However, terrorist attacks by the PKK, which is on the EU list of terrorist organisations,
     continued to claim many lives, not only in the south-east but also throughout Turkey. During
     the summer, terrorist attacks increased strongly throughout Turkey, including in major urban
     centres. Turkey conducted air strikes against terrorist hideouts in northern Iraq in May,
     following parliament’s decision to extend its 2007 motion authorising the government to
     order cross-border operations. At the same time, temporary security zones were established in
     several provinces, restricting access by civilians.

     The return of PKK members and refugees from the Mahmur camp has been put on hold. In
     October 2009, a group of 34 people crossed from Iraq as part of the government’s democratic
     opening. In July some of the refugees returned to Iraq.

     Concrete measures announced within the framework of the democratic opening fell short of
     the expectations and were not followed through and implemented.




     31
            Currently the law allows only village place names to be changed by a decision of the Council of
            Ministers.



EN                                                    34                                                      EN
      A large number of executives and politicians, including elected mayors from the BDP party,
     were arrested as part of operations against the KCK-PKK. Members of the Human Rights
     Association and Göçder Diyarbakır have also been arrested.

     Restrictions on the exercise of fundamental freedoms, in particular freedom of expression,
     stemming from a wide definition of terrorism under the Anti-Terror Law continue to be a
     cause for concern.

     Landmines remain a security concern for military personnel and civilians, after causing
     several casualties. The government reported continuing use of anti-personnel mines by the
     PKK. Under the ‘Ottawa Convention’ on the prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production
     and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction, Turkey has undertaken to
     destroy all anti-personnel mines in mined areas as soon as possible, but no later than 1 March
     2014.

     Landmine clearing at the border areas continues to be a priority. Following the adoption of the
     law on "mine clearing and tender procedures to be conducted at the land borders between
     Turkey and Syria", a "project management group" has been established in under the Ministry
     of Defence, working in particular on the re-demarcation of the Turkish-Syrian border. Further
     actions are needed to de-mine border areas in the country, in particular the ones adjacent to
     Iraqi and Iranian borders.

     No steps have been taken in addressing the problem of village guards, who are paid and
     armed by the State.

     Overall, despite public statements of commitment, the democratic opening announced by the
     government in August 2009 to address notably the Kurdish issue, was only partly followed
     through. Terrorist attacks increased. It is important to sustain efforts to address the Kurdish
     issue. The anti-terror legislation needs to be amended to avoid a broad interpretation, to
     improve the human rights situation in the region and to reduce the disproportionately high
     number of detainees linked to alleged terrorist acts. Landmines and the village guard system
     are still causes for concern.

     Refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)

     Continued progress has been made on the process of compensation of losses due to terrorism
     and the fight against terrorism since 2004. Since the law entered into force in March 2008,
     247,729 applications out of 360,660 have been resolved. Out of these applications 139,832
     received a positive decision and 106,887 were rejected. A total of 2,096,521,347 Turkish Lira
     had been paid to applicants so far. Numerous cases have been launched in administrative
     courts by rejected applicants. Several of them applied to the ECtHR.

     The Damage Assessment Commissions continue to face lack of resources and a heavy
     workload, which results in slow progress on assessment and payment of compensation.

     The situation of IDPs in urban areas remains a cause for concern. IDPs cannot return because
     of a wide range of factors, mainly the poor security situation and the presence of landmines,
     the lack of basic infrastructure and of capital, the limited job opportunities and the threat
     posed by the village guard system.




EN                                                 35                                                  EN
      In March 2010, two circulars were adopted with the aim of ensuring better access to and
     information on the asylum procedures and combating illegal migration. These are positive
     measures and some improvements have been observed.

     UNICEF notes that some efforts have been made to safeguard the rights of children of
     asylum-seekers to health care and education32.

     However, the lack of a comprehensive legal framework on refugees and asylum-seekers
     stands in the way of provision of services for their children. Only about a quarter of asylum-
     seeker and refugee children aged 7 to 14 attend school regularly, due to a mixture of financial,
     language and bureaucratic constraints and lack of demand. Unaccompanied asylum-seeker
     children benefit from the care services of the Child Protection Agency (SHÇEK). Efforts to
     locate the families of unaccompanied children are carried out by the UNHCR and the Turkish
     Red Crescent.

     Overall, compensation of internally displaced persons (IDPs) has continued. However,
     implementation is not effective. The government has not developed an overall national
     strategy to address the IDP issue and needs to step up efforts to address IDPs’ needs. The
     legal framework for refugees and asylum-seekers and implementation of circulars regarding
     procedures for applications need to be strengthened. Further improvements of the general
     conditions in foreigners’ detention centres is important.

     2.3.      Regional issues and international obligations

     Cyprus

     Turkey continued to express public support for the negotiations between the leaders of the
     two communities under the good offices of the UN Secretary-General. As emphasised by the
     negotiating framework and Council declarations, Turkey is expected to actively support the
     negotiations aimed at a fair, comprehensive and viable settlement of the Cyprus problem
     within the UN framework, in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council resolutions
     and in line with the principles on which the EU is founded. Turkey’s commitment in concrete
     terms to a comprehensive settlement is crucial.

     Despite repeated calls by the Council and the Commission, Turkey still has not complied with
     its obligations as outlined in the declaration of the European Community and its Member
     States of 21 September 2005 and in the Council conclusions, including the December 2006
     and December 2009 conclusions.

     It does not meet its obligation of full, non-discriminatory implementation of the Additional
     Protocol to the Association Agreement and has not removed all obstacles to the free
     movement of goods, including restrictions on direct transport links with Cyprus.




     32
              UNICEF: ‘Girls under eighteen are among the foreigners - mostly women from ex-Soviet countries –
              who are trafficked into Turkey as forced prostitutes. Thirty-one out of 706 victims of trafficking
              assisted by the International Organisation for Migration in Turkey between 2004 and mid-2009 were
              under eighteen, according to the IOM. Victims of human trafficking are provided with health and
              rehabilitation services by the Ministry of Health and, in the case of children, SHÇEK. Human
              trafficking is specifically prohibited by the Turkish Penal Code. It is worth noting that a third of all
              trafficked adult women have children of their own.’



EN                                                         36                                                            EN
      In addition, Turkey has not made progress towards normalising bilateral relations with the
     Republic of Cyprus. It continues to veto Cyprus’s membership of several international
     organisations, including the OECD and the Wassenaar Arrangement on export controls for
     conventional arms exports and dual-use goods. The Commission will continue to monitor
     closely and specifically report on all issues covered by the 21 September 2005 declaration, in
     accordance with the Council conclusions of December 2006.

     The government of the Republic of Cyprus reported violations of its territorial waters and
     airspace by Turkey.

     Peaceful settlement of border disputes

     Turkey and Greece have intensified their efforts to improve their bilateral relations. From 13
     to 15 May Prime Minister Erdogan met Greek Prime Minister Papandreou in Athens. A
     number of agreements for cooperation on trade, education, transport, energy, culture and the
     environment were signed. A bilateral agreement was reached to readmit a number of illegal
     migrants to Turkey, but is not yet in operation.

     The 47th round of exploratory talks was held in Athens in summer 2010. Exploratory talks
     have been continuing since 2002 and have intensified. The threat of casus belli in response to
     the possible extension of Greek territorial waters, made in the resolution adopted by the
     Turkish Grand National Assembly in 1995, still remains. In line with the Negotiating
     Framework, the Council conclusions of December 2009 noted that ‘Turkey needs to commit
     unequivocally to good neighbourly relations and to the peaceful settlement of disputes in
     accordance with the United Nations Charter, having recourse, if necessary, to the International
     Court of Justice. In this context, the Union urges the avoidance of any kind of threat, source
     of friction or action which could damage good neighbourly relations and the peaceful
     settlement of disputes.’ A considerable number of formal complaints were made by Greece
     about continued violations of its airspace by Turkey, including flights over Greek islands.
     Greece also made complaints about violations of its territorial waters.

     Regional cooperation

     Turkey remains actively involved in regional initiatives. It is a member of the Regional
     Cooperation Council (RCC) and also held the one-year rotating Chairmanship-in-Office of the
     South-East European Cooperation Process (SEECP), which ended with a summit in Istanbul
     in June.

     Bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and neighbouring EU Member States
     have been developing positively. Turkey has taken a number of initiatives in the Western
     Balkans, expressing commitment to promoting peace and stability in the region. Turkey
     supports integration of all countries in the region both with the European Union and at Euro-
     Atlantic level. The Turkish Foreign Minister held and facilitated several contacts throughout
     2010. Regular tripartite meetings were held between the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of
     Turkey, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. In parallel, regular tripartite talks have been held
     between Turkey, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. On Turkey’s initiative, the Presidents
     of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of Serbia met for the first time since the war. At their meeting
     in Istanbul in April, the three countries adopted the "Istanbul Declaration" and underlined that
     their common goal is integration into the European Union. They agreed that regional policy
     should be based on ensuring security, permanent political dialogue and preservation of the




EN                                                 37                                                   EN
      multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-religious nature of the region. The Turkish President
     visited Bosnia and Herzegovina in September.

     In addition, high-level bilateral meetings were conducted with Albania, the former Yugoslav
     Republic of Macedonia, Kosovo33, Montenegro and Serbia. The Turkish Prime Minister
     visited Serbia in July 2010. The Serbia-Turkey free trade agreement came into force in
     September 2010.

     On 20 November, an agreement was signed to lift visa requirements for Albanian citizens
     travelling to Turkey.

     Relations with Bulgaria remained positive.
     As regards the International Criminal Court (ICC), see Chapter 31 – Common foreign and
     security policy.

     3.      ECONOMIC CRITERIA

     In examining the economic developments in Turkey, the Commission’s approach was guided
     by the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, which stated that
     membership of the Union requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the
     capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union.

     3.1.    The existence of a functioning market economy

     Economic policy essentials

     The Pre-Accession Economic Programme (PEP) submitted to the Commission in January
     2010 adequately reflects needs and commitments to further reform. It draws largely on the
     Medium-Term Plan (MTP) published in mid-2009. The government’s new MTP, due by
     October 2010, should focus on the recovery conditions. The authorities largely adhered to the
     economic policy principles as reflected in the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Article IV
     report. The fragmentation of responsibilities between government bodies, however, continues
     to complicate coordination of budgeting and medium-term economic policy-making. Another
     challenge that Turkey is facing is to lock in its future economic success and stability in a
     consistent and comprehensive framework aimed at broader-based productivity growth and
     higher labour market participation. Strong inflationary pressures and a rapidly growing
     current account deficit have to be carefully monitored and addressed properly. Overall,
     consensus on economic policy essentials has been preserved. However, confidence in the
     government’s economic policy stance would benefit from better planning, coordination and
     communication.

     Macroeconomic stability

     GDP contracted by about 5% in 2009, a sharp contrast to the 6% average annual growth rate
     in the period 2004-08 and the growth of 0.7% in 2008. Turkey's GDP per inhabitant stands at
     46% of the EU average. The global financial crisis hit the economy hard dramatically
     reducing fixed investment and external demand. Fiscal and monetary stimulus measures,
     combined with a healthy banking sector, helped cushion the blow. After a severe contraction


     33
            Under UNSCR 1244/1999.



EN                                                38                                                 EN
      in the first half of 2009, economic growth resumed in the second half and then gained pace in
     the first half of 2010 recouping the output lost in 2009. Domestic demand drove the fastest
     expansion in almost six years. Real GDP increased in the first half of 2010 by 11% from a
     year earlier, up from 2% in the second half of 2009, reflecting a very significant recovery over
     the last year. All sectors demonstrated strong positive growth: trade, industry and construction
     expanded by over 15% in the first semester of 2010. Domestic demand and in particular
     investment were particularly strong, as the year-on-year growth in gross fixed capital
     formation amounted to a sheer 22%. The high growth in domestic demand translated into
     imports growth amounting to 20%. Net exports pulled down the growth performance by
     3.4%. Consumer and corporate loans have maintained their rapid pace and continue to spur
     domestic demand. High frequency indicators point at a growth slowdown – albeit gradual and
     from very high levels – starting in mid-2010. Overall, the Turkish economy has demonstrated
     high resilience. It is recovering rapidly from the crisis and growing at robust rates since mid-
     2009.
     Pressures on the current account – which had seen a major crisis-led improvement – started in
     late 2009, as robust domestic demand and higher energy prices fuelled imports, which
     increased by 30% in the first half of 2010. In tandem with the rise in imports, exports
     performed relatively well and rose by about 15% in the first six months of 2010.
     Consequently, the trade deficit more than doubled passing from 3% of GDP in the first half of
     2009 to 6.2% of GDP in the same period in 2010. The current account balance broadly shows
     similar patterns and the deficit is widening rapidly. In the first six months of 2010, the deficit
     amounted to 6.2% of GDP, compared with 2.7% in the same period of 2009. Total financing
     needs have almost doubled in 2010. The financing has been shifting dramatically towards
     more portfolio and in particular more cross-border credits to domestic banks (covering two
     thirds of the current account deficit) and less direct investment. Reserves rose by about €4
     billion to roughly €40 billion. The gross external debt stock amounted to 37% of GDP in the
     first half of 2010, down by about five percentage points from the same period in 2009. About
     two thirds is held by the private sector. Overall, external imbalances and financing needs have
     been growing significantly on the back of high domestic growth. Access to external finance
     remained unproblematic.
     In 2009, the unemployment rate amounted to 14%. In tandem with the recovery, the
     unemployment rate declined to 11% by mid-2010 from 13% in mid-2009. The non-farm
     unemployment rate, which stood at 17% in mid-2010, showed a broadly similar downward
     trend. The youth unemployment rate dropped faster, most likely due to the priority given to
     this segment in the employment package, to 20% from over 24% in July last year.
     Employment data show a marked improvement, as the number of employed increased by over
     1,000,000 compared with July last year. The employment rate went up from 42% in mid-2009
     to 44% in the same period of 2010. Female labour participation increased by over 1.5
     percentage points since mid-2009, but female employment remains particularly low, at just
     half the overall rate. The prevalence of undeclared work remains a crucial issue (See Chapter
     19: Social Policy and employment). Given the high unemployment rate and the annual growth
     rate of 1.2% in the working-age population, the labour market needs to absorb not only the
     unemployed but also one million new entrants every year. Overly strict employment
     protection discourages employers from hiring new people. Overall, the unemployment rate
     remains higher than pre-crisis and demographic factors are expected to keep unemployment
     high in years ahead in the absence of additional labour market reforms and the application of
     an appropriate combination of flexibility and security.




EN                                                  39                                                    EN
      Annual inflation was 6.3% in 2009. A combination of several unfavourable developments,
     such as price increases for unprocessed food and oil, base effects and administered price rises,
     has led to a significant increase in inflation since the last quarter of 2009. These factors
     pushed headline inflation significantly above the central bank target, leading to an adverse
     impact on inflation expectations. Between November 2009 and April 2010, inflation rose
     from 5.1% to 10.2% before falling to 8.3% in August, reflecting large volatility in food prices.
     The central bank expects inflation to fall towards the end of 2010, although it is unlikely to
     reach the central bank end-year target of 6.5%. Core inflation went up from about 3% in mid-
     2009 to 4% by August-2010. Turkey’s real policy rate is now low given the robust economic
     recovery. Cuts in the policy rate were transmitted to market rates, but at speeds and pass-
     through rates that varied across instruments. Rates on corporate lending declined the most, by
     more than 15 percentage points. Recovering domestic demand and easing lending standards in
     the second half of 2009 helped revive credit supply which accelerated further to an annualized
     rate of around 30% in the first half of 2010.The Turkish central bank is looking ahead to a
     period of strong growth and has announced plans to roll back the extraordinary measures put
     in place during the economic crisis in 2009 and to inject less liquidity into the market and
     currency reserves requirements have been increased. The operational structure of the central
     bank's liquidity management has been changed in order to ensure a better allocation of
     liquidity within the banking system and to reduce the dependence of banks on the central
     bank's lending facilities. Taking into account its reading of the – not yet closed – output gap
     (according to estimates by the central bank), the Monetary Policy Committee has indicated
     that the monetary tightening/exit strategy should be prudent and slow. Overall, price stability
     worsened, chiefly because of pressures stemming from energy and food inputs and buoyant
     economic activity, triggering a tighter monetary stance.

     Turkey’s fiscal consolidation over the past decade was very significant as, in the wake of the
     2001 financial crisis, the government managed to cut the public debt to GDP ratio from a high
     of over 70% in 2001 to less than 40% by mid- 2008. Structural loosening as well as cyclical
     factors weakened the fiscal balance from mid-2008 to mid-2009. The deterioration in public
     finances accelerated as fiscal measures to stimulate economic growth, equivalent to about 5%
     of GDP over the period 2009-2011, were taken to minimise some of the adverse effects of the
     crisis. They appear to have successfully propped up private consumption and are being phased
     out gradually. But they also caused the budget deficit to soar from 2.2% of GDP in 2008 to
     about 5.7% in 2009. So far, the budget performance has improved in 2010. Budget realisation
     in the first six months of 2010 was much better than anticipated, as strong consumption is
     leading to higher tax revenue performance (up 20% year-on-year). Tax increases also
     contributed (VAT and special consumption taxes on, amongst others, cars and white goods
     had previously been lowered to prop up consumption). Subsequently, in the first half of the
     year, the budget deficit declined significantly to only about half last year’s. The exit strategy
     was less visible on the spending side, as real expenditure remained at the same level as in
     2009. There are signs that pressures in some expenditure categories are building up (mainly
     personnel expenditure and capital spending). The public debt stock rose by around 6% year-
     on-year to less than 45% of GDP in mid-2010. According to the government, public debt
     should drop to the low 40s by the end of 2010, and subsequently continue to fall slowly. With
     an election scheduled in 2011, however, the fiscal picture could change. Overall, although the
     anti-crisis measures have cushioned the economic downturn, they must be exited in a timely
     fashion and targeted in order to lay the foundations for strong, sustained and balanced growth.

     The Public Financial Management Law was supposed to be implemented between 2007 and
     2010 and to make Turkey’s public finance administration broadly consistent with EU
     standards on internal controls. However, three years after the adoption of the law, the


EN                                                  40                                                   EN
      accountability, efficiency and transparency of the budgeting process would benefit from a
     modernisation of the public audit, while the adoption of the draft Turkish Competition
     Authority Law would contribute to less opacity on state aids in public finances. The
     unification of all tax administration functions under the Revenue Administration announced
     earlier has not been implemented in full. This unification would strengthen the audit capacity
     and facilitate greater use of standard risk-based audit techniques, thereby enhancing
     transparency and providing significant support for reducing informality. Overall, measures to
     increase fiscal transparency were modest.

     Over the last few years, Turkey had successfully implemented a strong stabilisation
     programme and the resilience of the Turkish economy had benefited from in-depth structural
     reforms in many key areas, including banking, restructuring of enterprises and privatisation,
     education and energy. Although the financial crisis has hit the Turkish real economy hard, the
     earlier regulatory and supervisory reforms have paid off and growth resumed rapidly and
     strongly. Turkey’s fiscal and monetary policy mix proved successful during the crisis and
     adjustments are being made in order to benefit from the recovery. A new draft law
     establishing a fiscal anchor that has potential for considerably improving the fiscal
     performance over time, as well as removing the current pro-cyclical bias of fiscal policy, was
     submitted to parliament in mid-July, but its discussion was postponed. Making more progress
     with fiscal transparency, strengthening the inflation targeting and preserving financial stability
     will be important to minimise the risks of a boom-bust scenario. Overall, although the current
     policy mix has proved effective in recent months, macroeconomic stability remains
     vulnerable and could benefit from a stronger fiscal anchor.

     Interplay of market forces

     The government has confirmed the independence of the regulatory and surveillance agencies.
     But despite the regulatory framework, government authorities still tend to set the prices in
     some key areas, including in electricity and gas markets, and to a lesser extent in
     telecommunications and transportation, in particular in rail transportation. Liberalisation of
     backbone services has advanced significantly and prepared the ground for several successful
     privatisations in the energy sector. Indeed, Turkey continued its privatisation efforts in a more
     challenging and crisis-prone environment. Total privatisations completed decreased from €4.4
     billion (1% of GDP) in 2008 to €1.6 billion (0.4% of GDP) in 2009. A total of 106
     transactions were completed in 2009. Ongoing major privatisations include the transfer of
     operating rights for 52 small-scale hydropower plants plus the privatisation of four sugar
     companies, electricity distribution in 13 regions and three ports. Overall, some progress has
     been made on improving the interplay of market forces. Privatisation has advanced, albeit at a
     slower pace due to the worsening external environment.

     Market entry and exit

     In 2009, the economic circumstances had a major impact on market entry and exit. The
     number of newly established firms decreased by 10%, while the number of firms which were
     closed down increased by 8.5%. Foreign owners still face restrictions in various areas,
     including maritime transport, civil aviation, ground-handling, road transport, radio and TV
     broadcasting, energy, accountancy and education. Licensing procedures are relatively lengthy.
     For example, 25 different procedures are still needed in order to build a warehouse, from
     securing licences and permits to completing the necessary notifications and inspections and
     obtaining utility connections. Market exit is difficult too, as closing a business still takes 3.3
     years on average. Moreover, claimants recover only one fifth of their claims from insolvent



EN                                                  41                                                    EN
      firms. Overall, market exit procedures remain relatively cumbersome. The crisis had a
     negative impact on the number of newly established firms.

     Legal system

     Turkey has established most of the legal framework of a market economy, but must ensure
     further implementation. A reasonably well functioning legal system, including in the area of
     property rights, has been in place for several years. Registering a property requires six
     procedures and takes six days in Turkey. However, enforcing commercial contracts remains a
     lengthy process, which involves 35 procedures and takes 420 days on average. The
     specialisation of commercial court judges is insufficient, leading to lengthy court proceedings.
     The expert witness system still functions as a parallel judiciary system, without improving the
     overall quality. Use of out-of-court dispute-settlement mechanisms remains low. Overall, the
     legal environment, in particular court procedures, continues to pose practical challenges and
     create obstacles to a better business environment.

     Financial sector development

     The banking sector has shown resilience to the global financial crisis, largely due to major
     improvements made to the regulatory and supervisory framework in previous years. Risk
     ratios in the financial sector remained robust. The sector also benefited from the central
     bank’s liquidity measures and some easing of regulations governing loan classification and
     provisioning requirements. In a crisis context, a temporary easing of conditions for
     restructuring loans and a temporary elimination of general provisioning for new loans aimed
     at preserving the banks’ high capital adequacy ratios while encouraging lending. These
     measures helped the nominal capital adequacy ratio to increase to almost 20% by early 2010,
     substantially higher than the EU legal requirement of 12%. Non-performing loans fell to
     about 5% by mid-2010 from a peak of about 6% at the end of 2009 and stress tests by the
     regulator show that the sector is sound. The banking sector, by far the largest part of the
     financial sector, increased its share to 78% of the total financial sector. The relative size of the
     insurance sector increased slightly to 3%, about the same size as mutual funds. Domestic
     private banks had a 32.5% share of total assets, whereas the share of foreign banks increased
     to 39.5%, taking into account foreigners’ investments in the stock exchange, which is
     equivalent to 20% of banking sector assets. The Istanbul Stock Exchange increased
     considerably during 2009, with total stock market capitalisation almost doubling, from 19%
     of GDP in 2008 to 37% in 2009 and over 40% of GDP by mid-2010. Concentration in the
     banking sector remained broadly stable, as the shares of the top five and top ten banks were
     60% and 80%, respectively. However, due to the very strong ongoing credit growth fuelled by
     increased consumer and business confidence and low interest rates, regulatory authorities
     need to remain vigilant. Overall, in difficult crisis conditions, the financial sector has shown
     resilience thanks to earlier reforms.

     3.2.     The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the
              Union

     Existence of a functioning market economy

     The strength of domestic demand is fuelling a fast recovery from recession, which confirms
     the economy's improved shock resilience. But it is also fuelling rapid expansion in the current
     account deficit, pointing to the return of persistent imbalances in the Turkish economy. As the
     recovery gets under way, a golden opportunity for structural reforms is being opened up by



EN                                                   42                                                     EN
      the sharp drop in real interest rates in recognition of Turkey’s solid fundamentals. At the same
     time, potential growth in Turkey is being held back by high inactivity and insufficiently
     broad-based productivity growth. Overall, the crisis did not jeopardise the functioning of
     market mechanisms.

     Human and physical capital

     The educational reform programme, which is a key part of the National Development Plan
     (2007-2013), is being implemented. It sets two key priorities for education, modernisation and
     reform: increase the responsiveness of education to demand and enhance the educational
     system. In 2010, the challenges remain significant. Although there has been some progress
     and the top students in Turkey are performing well, the vast majority of Turkish students
     perform at the lowest proficiency levels in basic skills and problem-solving. Participation in
     higher education remains low by international standards. Around 44% of 20- to 24-year olds
     go to university, 8 percentage points more than in 2006, while only 1.5% of school-age
     children fail to finish primary school, compared with 10% in 2006. Overall, reforms and
     increased spending on education are obviously having some positive impact on educational
     attainment, but significant problems persist.

     During the crisis, investment decreased and gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) fell by
     around 3% in 2009 to about 20% of GDP, but growth resumed by as much as 22% in the first
     half of 2010. Private capital formation totalled around 15% of nominal GDP. FDI inflows
     held up relatively well in 2009 helped by the privatisation of the electricity grids but fell by
     about 20% in the first half of 2010 compared with a year earlier. At the same time, their
     composition improved, as more than three quarters went into utilities and manufacturing. For
     many years infrastructure investment has been hampered by the need to consolidate public
     finances and the failure to cut lower-priority spending. Inadequate infrastructure is
     increasingly affecting economic activity. Though in 2009 and 2010 some ─ albeit modest ─
     progress can be reported on infrastructure, in particular roads and oil pipelines, there is a risk
     that inadequate infrastructure, including for power supply, could hamper the economic
     recovery. Gross electricity consumption growth has averaged some 7% in each of the last few
     years, and extra power-generating capacity is being constructed, albeit with some delays.
     Although the official government target was to increase research and development
     expenditure to 2% of GDP by 2010, R&D expenditure remains much lower, on just 1.4%.
     Overall, some limited progress was made on upgrading the country’s human and physical
     capital.

     Sectoral and enterprise structure

     The independence of the regulatory and surveillance agencies has been largely preserved.
     Market liberalisation has not advanced in agriculture, whereas some progress has been made
     in the pricing mechanisms for the energy sector. The sectoral shift from agriculture to services
     and industry was reversed by the slowdown in economic activity. The share of agriculture in
     overall employment increased from 23.7% to 24.7% between December 2008 and December
     2009. The share of services stabilised at 50%. On the other hand, both industry and
     construction saw their relative shares of total employment decline by a combined total of
     1.5%. The quality and frequency of data on small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
     remained poor. Various new initiatives have been launched to improve access to finance for
     SMEs. However, the share of SMEs in total banking sector loans decreased from 23% at the
     end of 2008 to 21.4% by December 2009. For instance, a new guarantee fund for SMEs was
     part of the stimulus packages with the aim of alleviating the impact of the crisis on SME



EN                                                  43                                                    EN
      finances. But the earmarked funds of €500 million were underutilised, as only seven SMEs
     had received credit guarantee support by 31 March 2010. The large informal sector which is
     fuelled by weaknesses in tax and expenditure policies, as well as in law enforcement, remains
     an important challenge. Turkey therefore adopted a comprehensive action plan to combat the
     informal economy in 2009. Overall, the crisis slowed down or even reversed structural shifts
     in economic activity. In spite of new initiatives by the Turkish government, the crisis has
     complicated access to finance for SMEs.

     State influence on competitiveness

     There has been no tangible progress in the field of state aid. As transparency in the decision-
     making process remains low, it is still difficult to judge the rationale and consistency of the
     individual decisions taken. In addition, the scale of state aid and its importance in some key
     sectors are likely to have increased substantially following the introduction of the various
     fiscal stimulus packages. Adoption of the commercial code has again been postponed. The
     absence of transparent monitoring of state aid and of supporting policies to reduce distortion
     continued to have an adverse effect on competition and competitiveness in the economy.
     Public procurement policies continued to be undermined by exceptions to the regulatory
     framework. Overall, state intervention continued to be untransparent, which might have had a
     negative effect on competition and competitiveness.

     Economic integration with the EU

     The openness of the Turkish economy, as measured by the total value of exports of goods and
     services as a percentage of GDP, decreased to about 47.5% of GDP by the end of 2009, from
     52.2% in 2008, largely in line with the crisis-led contraction in world trade. The EU’s share of
     Turkey’s total trade increased from 41.4% in 2008 to 42.6% in 2009. Its share in Turkey’s
     exports decreased from 48% in 2008 to 46% in 2009. While the EU’s share of Turkey’s trade
     varies slightly from year to year, depending on numerous factors, including commodity price
     trends and exchange rate movements, its decline in Turkey’s exports is likely to be the result
     of relatively more subdued demand in the EU. Simultaneously, Turkey was somehow able to
     diversify its exports towards other regions. The share of exports to African and Middle East
     countries in Turkey’s total exports increased from 10% in 2008 to over 20% in 2009. FDI
     inflows to Turkey from EU Member States remained very significant, growing from 75% of
     the total in 2008 to 80% in 2009, thus illustrating the strong economic interdependence
     between the EU and Turkey. Overall, trade and economic integration with the EU remained
     high. Turkey was able to diversify part of its trade towards new markets, thereby partly
     alleviating the impact of the crisis.

     Incipient nominal exchange rate appreciation pressures were observed in the first half of
     2010. In the year to July 2010, the exchange rate for the lira appreciated by 5% in nominal
     terms against a basket of 50% US dollar and 50% euro. In real effective terms, corrected for
     both producer and consumer price developments, the lira strengthened by 8%. Overall,
     standard indicators suggest that Turkey’s export competitiveness has stopped improving.


     4.      ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP

     This section examines Turkey's ability to assume the obligations of membership – that is, the
     acquis as expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation and the policies of the Union. It
     also analyses Turkey's administrative capacity to implement the acquis. The analysis is
     structured in accordance with the list of 33 acquis chapters. In each sector, the Commission's


EN                                                 44                                                   EN
      assessment covers progress achieved during the reporting period and summarises the
     country's overall level of preparations.

     4.1.    Chapter 1: Free movement of goods

     No progress can be reported towards alignment with the general principles applicable to free
     movement of goods. The legislation on standardisation in foreign trade marginally reduced
     the list of items subject to conformity assessment upon import in 2010. Restrictions applicable
     since 2009 on goods from non-EU countries in free circulation in the EU were not abolished
     in 2010. Such goods are still subject to conformity assessment procedures based on
     documentation accompanied, if necessary, by physical checks at the customs posts, thus
     delaying and sometimes inhibiting access to the Turkish market.
     Technical barriers to trade have increased in certain areas, such as pharmaceuticals. A new
     requirement calling for good manufacturing practice certificates for registration of
     pharmaceutical products for human use resulted in a de facto ban on imports from Europe by
     causing long delays in the registration process. The registration requirements for imports of
     textiles and clothing are still in force. The mutual recognition principle has not been
     introduced into the Turkish legal order, thus limiting free movement of goods in the non-
     harmonised area. Licences are still required for the import of goods considered old, renovated
     or faulty, for second-hand motor vehicles and for alcoholic beverages. Furthermore, exports
     of copper scrap have also been subjected to a licence which introduces a ban to exports
     contrary to the Customs Union provisions.
     As regards horizontal measures, further progress can be reported on standardisation. Over
     the reporting period the Turkish Standards Institute (TSE) continued to adopt European
     standards. So far it has adopted a total of 16,194 standards of the European Committee for
     Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation
     (CENELEC). Harmonisation with the European Telecommunication Standards Institute’s
     (ETSI) standards remained at around 350. The overall rate of harmonisation with European
     standards rose to 99.7%. The TSE is running 67 operational mirror committees, showing a
     decline in interest in voluntary standardisation activities since last year, when it had 86
     operational committees. The revised law reflecting the new structure of the TSE meeting the
     requirements for full membership of CEN-CENELEC has not yet been adopted.
     In terms of conformity assessment, further progress was achieved on notified bodies. There
     are now 14 Turkish notified bodies, compared with 12 in 2009, operating in the areas of toys,
     personal protective equipment, lifts, hot-water boilers, appliances burning gaseous fuels,
     construction products (cement), simple pressure vessels, pressure equipment, medical devices,
     recreational craft and machinery.
     Some progress can be reported on accreditation. TURKAK (the Turkish Accreditation
     Agency) is also the monitoring authority over good laboratory practice. The number of
     TURKAK accreditations increased by 17% compared with last year and reached the number
     of 465. Although TURKAK is already a member of the European Accreditation Cooperation
     (EA) and a signatory of seven EA multilateral agreements, the revised law aiming at further
     harmonising TURKAK's structure with the European accreditation system has not yet been
     adopted.
     Some progress can be reported in the area of legal metrology. The Ministry of Industry and
     Trade issued new and amending legislation on non-automatic weighing instruments, type
     approval of measures and measuring instruments and their inspection, metrological control



EN                                                 45                                                  EN
      methods for such instruments, the international system for units of measurement and nominal
     quantities of pre-packed products. Although progress has been made towards further
     alignment, full implementation of the Measuring Instruments Directive has not yet been
     achieved.
     There was some progress on market surveillance. The Under-Secretariat of Foreign Trade
     issued legislation to lay down a common template for market surveillance reports and
     notifications. A national surveillance strategy for 2010-2012 has been adopted. The Ministry
     of Industry and Trade and the Ministry of Agriculture published legislation for organisational
     aspects of market surveillance activities. The Under-Secretariat’s report on market
     surveillance activities in 2009 is a major step towards systematic collection of comparable
     surveillance data, even though a number of authorities were unable to contribute basic data.
     Market surveillance activities have continued to increase, even though some product
     categories deserve more focus, such as civil explosives, detergents, machinery and the non-
     harmonised area in general. Financial and human resources devoted to market surveillance are
     insufficient; in particular, more full-time specialised inspectors are needed. The use of
     appropriate risk assessment and sampling methods, which would help optimise the use of
     limited market surveillance budgets, remains limited, as is the evaluation of the effectiveness
     of the action taken. There is no database linking accidents and injuries to products. The
     visibility of market surveillance remains low. Coordination within and between surveillance
     agencies is still deficient, including on use of IT. Stakeholders are not systematically informed
     of market surveillance activities and measures and their general involvement in surveillance
     remains weak. In particular, consumer organisations need to be supported in order for them to
     better understand technical legislation and to use complaint mechanisms more effectively.
     Full alignment with the 2001 version of the general products safety directive remains
     outstanding. Full and systematic implementation of Regulation 765/2008, setting out the
     requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products,
     remains to be ensured, including provisions on external border controls.
     Alignment of horizontal measures is advanced. However, effective implementation of market
     surveillance and adoption of final changes to the legislation on standardisation and
     accreditation have yet to be achieved. Furthermore, the new legislative framework on
     marketing of products has yet to be adopted in the areas of market surveillance, conformity
     assessment procedures, CE marking and accreditation.
     Further progress was made on the old approach acquis. The Ministry of Industry and Trade
     adopted various pieces of legislation on the type approval of motor vehicles and emissions
     from vehicles and tractors. In particular, the Ministry of Trade and Industry published a
     regulation concerning the type approval of motor vehicles with regard to their reusability,
     recyclability and recoverability aiming to transpose the related EC Directive on the same
     subject. The same Ministry published a regulation and an implementing communiqué aiming
     to transpose the EC Regulation on the type approval of motor vehicles with regard to the
     protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users. The Ministry of Health issued an
     amending regulation regarding the packaging and labelling of pharmaceutical products for
     human use. The same Ministry issued an amending regulation on the pricing of
     pharmaceuticals for human use and provisions were adopted on clinical trials. The problem of
     protection of regulatory data persists and the authorisation system for generic medicines for
     which marketing authorisation was applied prior to 1 January 2005 remains in place. Turkey
     is continuing to violate the Customs Union obligations in this area. The Ministry of the
     Environment and Forestry issued a regulation on good laboratory practice which is of key
     importance for the chemicals sector. The requirements imposed on imports of alcoholic



EN                                                  46                                                   EN
      beverages remain burdensome. The Tobacco and Alcohol Board still requires the same
     documentation as it did before the import licence requirement was lifted. The documentary
     requirements to obtain the control certificate from the Ministry of Agriculture remain also
     burdensome. Alignment with the old approach acquis is advanced, but further efforts are
     needed to complete the process.
     Alignment with the new approach product legislation is already advanced. Limited further
     progress can be reported in this area. The Ministry of Public Works and Settlement issued
     legislation on the criteria applicable to the notified body and published technical
     specifications for construction products. The same Ministry abolished about 188 mandatory
     standards in the area of construction products. Mandatory certification by the Turkish
     Standards Institute for products falling under 22 standards is also abolished. The Ministry of
     Health published a communiqué laying down the principles and procedures for a warning
     system on medical devices.
     No progress can be reported on procedural measures. The Under-Secretariat of Foreign
     Trade continued implementing the provisions of Regulation 765/2008 regarding the control of
     products entering the EU market, even though this Regulation has not been transposed yet
     into Turkey's national legislation. No progress was made on cultural goods and firearms.
     There was no progress in the non-harmonised area. The mutual recognition principle still has
     not been introduced into Turkey’s trade arrangements. The Ministry of Public Works and
     Settlement issued legislation establishing a conformity assessment procedure for the G mark
     for all construction products in the non-harmonised area with effect from July 2010. This
     legislation creates an advantage for products that carry the TSE mark (Turkish Standards
     Institute's quality mark). Conformity assessment bodies were assigned for this purpose. The
     provision concerning products originating from non-EU countries, including those put into
     free circulation in the EU and re-exported to Turkey, has not been revised. These construction
     products would still have to go through conformity assessment checks in Turkey.
     Turkey has still not fully incorporated into its domestic legal order all EU acts for the removal
     of technical barriers to trade enumerated in Annex II to Decision 2/97 of the EU-Turkey
     Association Council. Moreover, Turkey has still not accepted the update of the Annex to this
     Decision reflecting acquis adopted since 1997.
     ‘Free movement of goods’ is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey
     adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and
     endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in
     place on the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or
     whose last port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to implement fully the
     acquis relating to this chapter.
     Conclusion
     Limited progress can be reported in this chapter. Although alignment is advanced, the new
     legislative framework on marketing of products has yet to be transposed into the Turkish legal
     order and the requirements of the acquis need to be fully incorporated. Technical barriers to
     trade are still hampering free movement of goods and new barriers have been added in areas
     such as pharmaceuticals and construction products. Deficiencies persist in the market
     surveillance system. The mutual recognition principle still has not been introduced in
     Turkey’s trade legislation and the problem of data protection in connection with
     pharmaceutical products remains unsolved. Turkey needs to fully implement Decision 1/95 on



EN                                                  47                                                   EN
      the EU-Turkey Customs Union, including the update of Annex II to Decision 2/97, and to
     abolish the remaining import and export licences and the restrictions on imports of used
     products, in particular motor vehicles.

     4.2.    Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers

     With regard to access to the labour market, Turkey amended the Law on work permits for
     foreigners, introducing the possibility of preliminary permits for up to one year for foreigners
     providing ‘professional services’. The Regulation on enforcement of the Law on employment
     of foreigners was also amended. The new regulation explicitly mentions that foreign experts
     employed in projects under financial cooperation programmes between Turkey and the EU
     are not required to obtain a work permit during their assignment. However, a comprehensive
     reform of the Law on work permits for foreigners has been pending in parliament since 2007.
     Regarding Turkey's participation into EURES (European Employment Services), the IT
     infrastructure, electronic services and staff capacity of the Turkish Employment Agency
     (ISKUR) need improvement.
     The social security institution continued to receive expertise and training to improve its
     capacity for coordination of social security systems.
     There were no developments as regards the European health insurance card.
     Conclusion
     There has been little progress on freedom of movement for workers. Alignment is at an early
     stage.

     4.3.    Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services

     There has been limited progress on the right of establishment and freedom to provide services.
     Work on the preparation of the detailed strategy related to alignment with the acquis is
     ongoing.
     As regards the right of establishment, disproportionate requirements are still in place.
     There has been no progress in the area of freedom to provide cross-border services.
     Registration, licence or authorisation requirements incompatible with the acquis still exist.
     Service-providers already established in an EU Member State are subject to such
     requirements before they can obtain work and residence permits. No legislative or regulatory
     steps have been taken to align with the Services Directive. An amending regulation regarding
     professional tourist guides, as well as chamber of commerce regulations on agricultural and
     shipping engineers, confirmed the nationality requirements imposed, which are not in line
     with the acquis. A systematic structure for identifying obstacles to exercise freedom to
     provide cross border services has not yet been set up. The Ministry of Industry and Trade, the
     coordinating body for implementing the Service Directive, started working on establishing a
     Point of Single Contact for the provision of services.
     No progress can be reported on postal services. The draft postal law has not yet been
     adopted. The accounting system still lacks transparency. The legal monopoly remains in place
     and an independent regulatory authority has not yet been established.
     Little progress can be reported on mutual recognition of professional qualifications. A
     decision of the Constitutional Court annulled the remaining references to women in the Law


EN                                                 48                                                   EN
      on nurses. The regulation laying down minimum training conditions for regulated professions
     subject to automatic recognition was amended. However, recognition of professional
     qualifications is still not differentiated from recognition of academic qualifications. Some
     regulated professions are still subject to reciprocal recognition. Nationality and language
     requirements remain.
     ‘The right of establishment and freedom to provide services’ is one of the eight chapters
     covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External
     Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December
     2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on the free movement of goods carried by
     vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or whose last port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will
     not be in a position to implement fully the acquis relating to this chapter.
     Conclusion
     Alignment under this chapter is, overall, at an early stage. No progress can be reported in the
     areas of right of establishment, freedom to provide cross border services, and postal services.
     There has been very limited progress regarding mutual recognition of professional
     qualifications.

     4.4.     Chapter 4: Free movement of capital

     There has been no progress in capital movements and payments over the reporting period.
     Turkey has yet to make significant progress on alignment of its legislation with the acquis.

     The legislative framework regulating real-estate acquisition by foreigners remains
     inconsistent with Article 63 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Turkey
     still needs to propose an action plan for gradual liberalisation of acquisition of real estate by
     foreigners in line with the acquis and to demonstrate that it is making progress towards
     gradual liberalisation, which is a key element for the accession negotiations in this chapter.

     There has been no progress on removing remaining restrictions on foreign direct investments
     originating from the EU, a priority in this area. Sectoral restrictions remain in place, for
     example on energy, transport, education and radio and TV broadcasting. A draft law raising
     the limit on foreign participation in the above-mentioned areas is before parliament. Turkey’s
     overall level of preparedness in the area of capital movements and payments is limited.

     No progress can be reported on further alignment of Turkey’s payment systems legislation
     with the acquis. The Central Bank revised its communiqué on use of the IBAN (international
     bank account number) in bank transfers, making its use in practice optional if the recipient’s
     IBAN is unknown. Adoption of a new payment systems law in line with the acquis is
     pending. The overall level of preparedness in payment systems remained incomplete.

     Progress has been made on alignment with the acquis on the fight against money
     laundering. A number of regulations have been adopted to implement the 2006 Law on the
     prevention of laundering proceeds of crime and the 2008 action plan, which is a key element
     for the accession negotiations in this chapter. A regulation introduced detailed provisions on
     customer identification, including real persons, legal persons and entities and electronic
     transfers. Another regulation adopted allows obliged parties to take simplified measures in
     terms of customer due diligence. The Ministry of Finance is authorised to decide
     implementing measures and the types of transactions falling within the scope of this
     regulation.



EN                                                  49                                                   EN
      The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) included Turkey amongst 25 countries subject to a
     targeted review because of deficiencies with regard to nine out of ten key and core
     recommendations. At its plenary session in February 2010, the FATF published a list entitled
     ‘Improving global AML/CFT compliance: on-going process’ which also includes Turkey.
     Particular deficiencies identified include areas such as criminalisation of financing of
     terrorism and an adequate legal framework for identifying and freezing terrorist assets.
     Turkey submitted to the FATF an action plan setting out the measures to address the
     deficiencies.

     The Turkish Financial Investigation Unit (MASAK) signed memoranda of understanding for
     exchanges of information with its counterparts in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine,
     Japan and Norway.

     A considerable increase was recorded in the number of suspicious transaction reports relating
     to possible money laundering: 9,823 reports were notified to MASAK in 2009, compared with
     4,924 in 2008 Most of them were submitted by the banking sector. In contrast, the number of
     suspicious transaction reports concerning financing of terrorism decreased to 49 in 2009 from
     228 in 2008. Prosecutions were brought in 23 cases in 2009, compared with 42 in 2008; 15 of
     those resulted in opening of cases before courts in 2009, compared with 34 in 2008.
     Convictions, confiscations, seizures and freezing of assets remain limited.

     Turkey applied the 2008 Law regarding recovery of certain assets to the national economy
     until December 2009. Statistics are not available on suspicious transaction reports made under
     this law. MASAK included specific courses on the law in the training programme for obliged
     parties. It continued running training activities for examiners, judges, prosecutors and obliged
     parties. The capacity of MASAK needs to be strengthened and training of the judiciary and
     law enforcement bodies needs to continue. Turkey has not yet ratified the Council of Europe
     Convention on laundering, search, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds from crime and on
     the financing of terrorism (CETS 198), although it signed it in 2007.

     Conclusion

     Progress has been made on alignment with the acquis on the fight against money laundering,
     but the legal framework against financing of terrorism is still incomplete. There has been no
     progress on capital movements and payments, nor on payment systems, areas in which
     alignment with the acquis remains incomplete. Obstacles still stand in the way of acquisition
     of real estate by foreigners. Sectoral restrictions are still in place, including on foreign direct
     investments originating from the EU.

     4.5.     Chapter 5: Public procurement

     No progress can be reported on general principles. Extensive use of the 15% price advantage
     for domestic bidders continued. The advantage clause was applied to 24% of the overall
     contract value which was above the threshold, as opposed to 18% in 2009. There was a
     significant increase in the number of contracts covered by exclusions and via direct purchases.
     In all, 28% of contracts and 12% of the overall contract value were not subject to the tender
     procedures stipulated in the Public Procurement Law. Revision of the legislation is necessary
     to reduce the frequency of use of alternative procurement procedures. Preparations are
     moderately advanced in this area.

     Some progress has been made on award of public contracts. The strategy adopted in
     February 2010 for enhancing transparency and strengthening the fight against corruption is a


EN                                                   50                                                    EN
      positive step to enhance integrity in public procurement activities. The Public Procurement
     Authority launched a call centre to provide advisory services to procuring entities in January
     2010. Comprehensive guides to supply, service and works tenders were published in May
     2010.

     Turkey’s public procurement legislation remains different from the acquis in various respects.
     Turkey has not repealed derogations contradicting the acquis, nor has it further aligned its
     legislation, or its scope, particularly on utilities, concessions and public-private partnerships.
     Classical sectors and utilities are still subject to the same public procurement procedures. In
     the absence of a coherent legal framework, there is a lack of transparency about the award of
     concessions and public-private partnerships. Preparations are not very advanced in this area.

     Turkey has drafted an alignment strategy on public procurement, with milestones on the way
     to eventual full alignment. The strategy now needs to be adopted and implemented.

     The necessary administrative capacity is in place both in the Public Procurement Authority
     and in the State Planning Organisation. The Ministry of Finance coordinates policy
     formulation and plays an implementing role confirmed by law. An ad-hoc unit set up in 2009
     under the Directorate of budget and financial control is being restructured with a view to
     providing better coordination of public procurement reform. However, administrative and
     operational capacity needs further improvement. Market functionality and competition with
     other stakeholders (contracting entities and economic operators) are satisfactory in most
     sectors. Preparations are highly advanced in this domain.

     No progress can be reported on alignment with the Remedies Directives. The Public
     Procurement Board has a maximum of 20 calendar days to reach a decision and announce it
     on the website. Turkey will need to align its legislation on review procedures with the acquis
     and to strengthen its administrative capacity and enforcement mechanisms. Preparations are
     moderately advanced in this area.

     Conclusion

     Some progress can be reported in this chapter. The institutional set-up and administrative
     capacity are advanced. A draft alignment strategy, with a time-bound action plan, needs to be
     adopted. Turkey has not completed the alignment of the scope of its legislation to the acquis,
     particularly on utilities, concessions and public-private partnerships.

     4.6.     Chapter 6: Company law

     Little progress can be reported on company law. No progress has been made towards
     adoption of the long-pending Turkish Commercial Code (TCC) and the Law on the entry into
     force and implementation of the TCC. Without adoption of the TCC, electronic disclosure of
     and access to company information is not possible. Nor is online company registration
     operational either. Adoption of other draft laws is contingent upon entry into force of the
     TCC.
     The Capital Market Board (CMB) issued a communiqué on the principles of takeovers. In
     particular, the concept of control of a company has been defined in the securities legislation
     for the first time. New rules were introduced for setting the price of the bid, mandatory bids,
     voluntary bids and public disclosure in line with the directive.




EN                                                  51                                                    EN
      The CMB further amended the communiqué on the principles regarding mergers in order to
     enhance transparency. In cases of acquisition of one company by another which holds 95% or
     more of its shares, a simplified procedure will be applied. The disclosure document on the
     merger will have to be published electronically.
     Turkey amended its Law on financial reporting in the capital market. As a result, companies
     must disclose annual and interim financial reports on their websites and keep them available
     to the public for five years.
     Some progress can be reported in the area of corporate accounting. The Turkish Accounting
     Standards Board (TASB) published several standards, interpretations and revisions of a
     number of international accounting standards (IAS). The standards apply to 600 listed
     companies. Specialised training was organised for TASB staff members.
     Limited progress can be reported on auditing. The CMB issued a communiqué on principles
     for independent auditing standards in the capital markets. The CMB also changed the sanction
     of ‘permanent cancellation’ of the independent audit licence to ‘the cancellation of not less
     than two years. After two years, the independent audit firm can apply for lifting of the
     sanction.
     Partially in line with the Directive on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated
     accounts, a database on independent audit firms was opened to the public. The CMB speeded
     up quality controls on audit firms and joined the International Forum of Independent Audit
     Regulators in order to intensify cooperation with international organisations. The regulatory
     framework for auditing is not in place. A public oversight body for statutory auditors and
     audit firms has yet to be established.
     Conclusion
     Overall, limited progress was made in this chapter during the reporting period. The new
     Commercial Code has not yet been adopted. The administrative capacity of the TASB
     requires further strengthening. The legal and institutional framework for auditing is not yet in
     place.

     4.7.    Chapter 7: Intellectual property law

     In the area of copyright and neighbouring rights, the Directorate-General for Copyrights
     (DGCC) in the Ministry of Culture and Tourism (MoCT) improved its online services.
     Coordination and cooperation between the copyright bodies has further improved as a result
     of training organised jointly by the MoCT, the police, the judiciary and the anti-piracy
     commissions. After the police joined the anti-piracy commissions, physical piracy has
     decreased. However, in cities other than Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir, conducting ex-officio
     raids against pirated products is very difficult, due to the lack of a common understanding of
     the legislation on the part of enforcers and the complicated wording of the rules on
     banderolling. The rules and procedures for the fight against piracy need simplification. In
     particular, adoption of the pending package of amendments to the Law on intellectual and
     artistic works is crucial.
     No progress can be reported in the legislative framework for industrial property rights. A
     constructive and structured dialogue should be established between the Turkish Patent
     Institute (TPI) and IPR-holders. Issues linked to bad faith and similar trade marks and
     industrial designs remain unresolved. The re-examination board needs more legal experts. The
     search and examination capacity of the Patent Department needs to be improved. The draft



EN                                                 52                                                   EN
      laws regulating industrial design and patent and geographical indication rights, including
     deterrent criminal sanctions, prepared by the TPI in consultation with other stakeholders need
     to be urgently adopted by parliament as the deadline for the adoption of new legislation
     expired on 10 June 2010.
     Following the decision of the Constitutional Court to revoke criminal provisions on trademark
     infringements in the trademark decree-law, Turkey adopted a new trademark law. On the
     basis of the same decision, the Supreme Court of Turkey decided that a defendant under the
     repealed criminal provisions of the trademark decree-law should be acquitted of all charges.
     Moreover, confiscated counterfeit goods had to be returned to the defendants, since they were
     no longer the subject of a crime. As a result, a big number of counterfeit goods found their
     way back to the Turkish market and possibly to other markets too. Turkey did not act timely
     to prevent the above negative development. The Court also ruled that the provisions of the
     Turkish Commercial Code on unfair competition cannot apply to trademark cases. This
     decision of the Supreme Court is another negative development with regard to criminal
     enforcement of trademark rights in Turkey.

     As regards enforcement, the high-level inter-ministerial Intellectual and Industrial Property
     Coordination Board eventually agreed to establish an IPR working group as a platform for
     dialogue between the EU and Turkey. Establishment of such dialogue on IPR issues and
     successful engagement of Turkey in it is a key element for the accession negotiations on this
     chapter.

     The IT system of the customs authorities has been fully centralised. One complaint about IPR
     infringements will be sufficient to seize counterfeit goods at all customs posts. However, the
     customs controls against counterfeit and pirated goods are not yet up to the expected level and
     no accurate data are available about checks and seizures.

     As part of IPR criminal enforcement, the Turkish police force continued its successful
     operations to fight piracy and counterfeiting during the reporting period. However, piracy and
     counterfeiting remain widespread, since there is no technical tracking of criminals and tools
     against organised crime are not employed.

     Preliminary court injunctions are difficult to obtain in response to IPR infringements,
     especially for patent cases. Judicial procedures are very lengthy: a final decision takes, on
     average, three to four years, while preliminary injunctions are sometimes decided within three
     or four months. Access to judicial decisions on IPR is very limited and random. In negative
     clearance cases for pharmaceuticals, the owner of the patent (defendant) is not able to
     examine the plaintiff’s documents or technical information on the product in the market
     authorisation files.
     Reports by expert witnesses are unnecessarily required by some courts in cases where the
     judge’s legal and professional expertise should suffice to solve the conflict. This common
     practice makes IPR enforcement very lengthy and costly. Furthermore, the independence and
     impartiality of the expert witnesses are not ensured. In some patent cases, the expert witnesses
     are not sufficiently knowledgeable of the patentability criteria.
     Adoption of a law on IPR enforcement procedures, in line with the EU Enforcement
     Directive, is needed, as IPR cases have different merits than other court cases. IPR
     stakeholders and public bodies need to improve their coordination and awareness on the risks
     of IPR infringements.




EN                                                 53                                                   EN
      Conclusion
     Overall, alignment of the legislation with the acquis is relatively high, although
     implementation and enforcement are still problematic. Turkey’s decision to agree to establish
     an IPR working group with the Commission is a positive development addressing a key
     element of the accession negotiations on this chapter. Adoption of crucial updated draft laws
     regulating industrial property rights, including deterrent criminal sanctions, is pending. Closer
     coordination and cooperation between the IPR-related public bodies and specialised IPR
     enforcement units is of the utmost importance. IPR holders should be better represented in
     public IPR platforms. Greater public awareness of the risks which counterfeit and pirated
     goods pose to consumer safety, public order and health should also be a priority.
     Inconsistencies in practices between the different IPR courts and discrepancies between TPI
     and court decisions persist and reliable statistics are still not available.

     4.8.     Chapter 8: Competition policy

     Turkey made some progress in the field of antitrust. The Competition Authority adopted two
     sets of implementing legislation. These rules introduce defendants’ right to oral hearings, the
     rights of access to case files and rules on protection of business secrets. The Competition
     Authority and the Public Procurement Authority signed a protocol facilitating exchanges of
     information and cooperation for handling competition infringements in public tenders.
     However, Turkey needs to transpose the acquis on horizontal cooperation agreements and the
     de minimis rules. Moreover, the Turkish Competition Act does not apply to banking mergers
     and acquisitions of market shares below 20%.
     The Competition Authority’s overall administrative capacity is high. It has a satisfactory level
     of administrative and operational independence and is committed to providing a high level of
     training for its staff. The authority has a solid track record on implementing the competition
     rules.
     There has been no progress towards alignment of the rules concerning public undertakings
     and undertakings holding exclusive and special rights.
     Good progress can be reported in the area of State aid. The law on monitoring and
     supervision of State aids has been adopted. It also establishes a competent authority for this
     task, which is supported by an institutional structure within the Undersecretariat of Treasury,
     has been adopted. These bodies now need to become operational as soon as possible. The law
     provides provisions on notification and monitoring of aid schemes in line with Turkey's
     Customs Union obligations. The services sector is excluded from its scope.
     In 2009, Turkey adopted a stimulus package targeting the least developed regions of the
     country. Some parts of this package have yet to be adjusted to Customs Union rules.

     Little progress was made on State aid to the steel sector. State practices in support of this
     sector between 2001 and 2006 need to be finally assessed. No progress has been made in
     establishing institutions or a legal framework to regulate state aid in the transport or energy
     sector.

     Conclusion
     In the field of antitrust and merger control, Turkey has a high level of alignment. It is
     enforcing the competition rules effectively. The Competition Authority continues to enjoy a
     satisfactory level of administrative and operational independence. Good progress has been



EN                                                  54                                                   EN
      made in the area of State aid. A State aid law establishing a monitoring authority has been
     adopted It is now expected that Turkey adjusts its State aids to the requirements of the
     Customs Union and of the ECSC Free Trade Agreement.

     4.9.     Chapter 9: Financial services

     There has been some progress in the areas of banks and financial conglomerates. The
     authorities introduced new measures with a view to mitigating the negative impact of the
     global crisis on the banking sector and their balance sheets. The Central Bank of Turkey and
     the Banking Regulatory and Supervisory Authority (BRSA) have brought some flexibility to
     the reserve and liquidity requirements. The BRSA signed MoUs with the Banking Control
     Commission of Lebanon and the National Bank of Ukraine, increasing the total number of
     such agreements to 21. The BRSA further improved its supervisory and enforcement capacity,
     by updating its risk-based audit guidelines and initiating surveys for the regulatory impact
     assessment of draft implementing legislation. . The BRSA was accepted as a member of the
     Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and Financial Stability Board in 2009. No progress
     can be reported regarding the implementation of the Basel II Accord for credit institutions and
     investment firms. The legislation in the area of banks and financial conglomerates remains
     largely satisfactory.
     Some progress can be reported in the areas of insurance and occupational pensions. The
     Treasury still retains the right to revise motor third party liability insurance tariffs if it deems
     necessary. The Treasury required all insurance companies to report their outsourcing activities
     on a quarterly basis with a view to monitoring the risks they are exposed to. The Treasury
     issued a detailed communiqué on catastrophic risks and on the requirement for insurance
     companies to take into account the previous claims history of their customers. The main gaps
     in the insurance legislation are the calculation of solvency margins, the minimum amounts of
     cover in motor third party liability insurance, which are very low, and the coverage of the
     guarantee fund. Overall alignment with the acquis in the insurance sector remained partial.

     Alignment of insurance legislation with the Solvency II framework — the Solvency II
     Directive 2009/138/EC and its implementing measures — is currently being prepared.

     No progress has been made in the establishment of an independent regulatory and supervisory
     authority in the insurance and occupational pensions sector.
     Turkey’s legislative framework on financial market infrastructure is already largely in line
     with the acquis.
     Some progress can be reported in securities markets and investment services. The Capital
     Markets Board (CMB) published a communiqué on real investment trusts to facilitate initial
     public offerings. The CMB has become a member of the International Forum of Independent
     Audit Regulators. The Turkish Capital Market Consultation Council has been established, a
     high-level coordination body to improve cooperation in securities markets. As a provisional
     measure, the CMB has obtained general ministerial approval for the listing of foreign
     securities at the Istanbul Stock Exchange. The CMB amended the communiqué on
     intermediary activities and intermediary institutions, facilitating entry and exit in the
     brokerage market. There has been no progress as regards investor compensation schemes,
     market abuse and undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS).
     However, some progress can be noted with regard to the Markets in Financial Instruments
     Directive (MiFID) and prospectus requirements. There has been further progress in




EN                                                   55                                                     EN
      strengthening prudential and supervisory standards in both banking and the non-bank
     financial sectors as referred above.
     ‘Financial services’ is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted
     by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed
     by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on
     the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or whose last
     port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to implement fully the acquis
     relating to this chapter.
     Conclusion
     There has been some progress in the area of financial services, as supervisory authorities
     introduced further prudential measures. Turkey’s overall alignment with the acquis remains
     partial.

     4.10.   Chapter 10: Information society and media

     Concerning electronic communications and information technologies, progress can be
     reported. The regulator (ICTA) has continued to align regulations with the EU framework
     following the enforcement of the new Electronic Communications Law of November 2008, in
     particular as regards authorisation, spectrum management, access and interconnection,
     numbering, number portability, rights of way, and tariffs.

     ICTA introduced a strategic plan for 2010-2012 which provides a three-year perspective for
     the sector. Publication of ICTA Board decisions on the internet is a positive development with
     regard to transparency and accountability of the regulator’s activities.

     However, the primary law and the implementing regulations are not yet fully aligned with the
     acquis. The authorisation procedures confer a margin of discretion on the regulator that could
     lead to legal unpredictability. The market review process is insufficiently established, giving
     discretionary powers to the regulator to decide when and how to impose obligations on
     operators, notably in the access conditions. Furthermore, the Framework Law does not
     provide the necessary conditions and the setting to ensure transparency and independence of
     the regulatory authority. This is one of the key elements for the accession negotiations in this
     chapter. The implementation of universal service obligations continues to be largely divergent
     from the EU Directive.

     Total revenue of alternative operators is 14% of total revenue of the telecom sector. Fixed line
     telephony services have been opened for competition. However, the share of alternative
     operators has remained limited. No progress was achieved regarding number portability on
     fixed lines. The authorisation of mobile virtual network operator services, and issuance of the
     implementing regulation on authorisation of broadband wireless access services operators, are
     pending. Communications charges imposed on operators remain high.
     As regards information society services, limited progress can be reported towards legislative
     alignment. Turkey is not a party to the European Convention on the legal protection of
     services based on, or consisting of, conditional access. The Law on electronic signature still
     shows several discrepancies with the EU Directive. The Law on internet content and the
     conditions under which internet providers can operate appear not to be in line with
     international standards protecting freedom of expression and may affect citizens’ rights
     relating to internet access. (See the section on freedom of expression)



EN                                                 56                                                   EN
      As regards audiovisual policy, the Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) adopted a
     regulation in November 2009 that lifted the time restrictions for private broadcasters and
     allowed 24-hour broadcasting in languages other than Turkish. The Regulation also removed
     the subtitle/consecutive translation requirement, thus opening the way for live broadcasts.
     Limitations as regards children’s and language teaching programmes have also been lifted. As
     a consequence, the number of radio stations and TV channels broadcasting in languages other
     than Turkish has increased to 15 (5 TV channels and 10 radio stations), all of them
     broadcasting regionally.
     The consultation forum with broadcasters continued, although on an irregular basis. RTÜK
     has reinforced its monitoring capacity by recruiting new staff who speak Kırmanji and Zaza.
     For the moment however, the monitoring of all local TV and radio broadcasts are carried out
     with the contributions of the monitoring units of the local police in line with a protocol that
     was first signed in 1998 and amended in 2006.
     TRT became a shareholder in Euronews, whose Turkish service has been on air since January
     2010, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Euronews in Turkish is distributed all over Turkey by
     TRT and is available on all distribution networks. In addition, TRT 2 is using Euronews
     programmes and the Turkish internet service also features Euronews programmes on demand.

     In terms of alignment with the acquis, however, there has been no development. Media
     legislation is not yet aligned with the Audiovisual Media Services Directive. The draft law
     aiming to implement the directive was submitted to parliament in May 2010. RTÜK has not
     yet reallocated frequencies and the broadcasters have continued to use terrestrial frequencies
     on a de facto basis. The licensing deadlock continues to damage the broadcasting industry and
     also causes technical difficulties, such as significant interference, including cross-border, on
     both telecommunication systems and television and radio broadcasts. Switchover to digital
     would solve this problem, since Turkey adopted a roadmap on digital switchover in 2009, in
     line with the objective set by the European Commission for EU Member States.

     The interpretation of certain articles of the broadcasting law and the sanctions imposed on
     broadcasters raised concerns. In June, RTÜK imposed a broadcasting ban on a channel for the
     words of a writer who spoke about the Armenian issue and which according to the regulator
     exceeded the limits of criticism.
     Conclusion
     Turkey has made progress in aligning the national legislation with the EU framework on
     electronic communications and information technologies. However, the primary law and the
     implementing regulations are not yet fully aligned with the acquis. Several obstacles to
     market development, not least in the internet broadband market, remain in place. In order to
     enhance competition in the sector, the regulatory authority’s independence and effectiveness
     should be reinforced. Regarding information society services and audiovisual policy, there has
     been little progress and the legislative alignment remains at an early stage. In the area of
     information society and media, Turkey should continue efforts for further alignment and
     enforcement of regulations.

     4.11.   Chapter 11: Agriculture

     Limited progress can be reported towards legislative alignment with the common agricultural
     policy (CAP). Turkey has not yet adopted a law to restructure the Ministry of Agriculture and




EN                                                 57                                                   EN
      Rural Affairs (MARA), an important step in developing the administrative structures
     necessary to implement the CAP.

     Progress on horizontal issues has been limited to preparations for the integrated
     administration and control system (IACS), a key element for the accession negotiations in this
     chapter. The strategy for a land parcel identification system (LPIS) and farmer registration
     system has been adopted by the Turkish authorities. No progress can be reported regarding the
     farm accountancy data network (FADN). Regarding agricultural statistics, another key
     element for the accession negotiations in this chapter, a protocol has been signed to enhance
     cooperation between MARA and the Turkish Statistics Institute. However, the absence of an
     adopted strategy remains a shortcoming.

     There has been limited progress on alignment of the Turkish agricultural policy with the CAP,
     a further key element for the accession negotiations in this chapter. Coupled direct support
     continues to be the main type of support to Turkey's agricultural sector. Turkey has been
     developing a strategy aimed at adjusting its support policy to future integration in the CAP but
     no significant progress has been achieved in the reporting period. As concerns the agricultural
     budget in 2010, a significant rise took place in area-based payments for hazelnut production,
     replacing previous public intervention measures for this crop. The adoption of implementing
     regulations introducing payments per head for cattle and sheep and goats represents some
     degree of convergence with current CAP measures.

     Following the substantial increase in consumer meat prices over the past year, the government
     declared a partial lifting of the import ban for live cattle and beef meat, which represents
     progress in solving this long-standing problem. However, Turkey continues to remain in
     breach of its bilateral obligations under the trade agreement for agricultural products, in
     particular by not allowing the import of live animals from a great majority of Member States.
     The complete removal of the ban for live cattle and beef meat remains a key element for the
     accession negotiations on this chapter.

     There has been no progress in the area of common market organisation.

     As regards rural development, the sectoral agreement laying down detailed rules for the
     implementation of IPARD (Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for Rural Development)
     has been signed and ratified. Progress has been observed in the recruitment and training of
     personnel and towards accreditation of the IPARD agency, a key element for the accession
     negotiations in this chapter. The national accreditation of the IPARD-related structures,
     originally planned for the beginning of 2009, was completed in July 2010. Further checks of
     the compliance of these structures with IPARD accreditation criteria need to be done by the
     European Commission before the conferral of management can be granted to Turkey and the
     implementation of the IPARD programme can start. Major efforts are still needed by the
     Managing Authority and the IPARD Agency to ensure good absorption capacity and prevent
     the loss of IPARD funds. Progress has also been noted through the adoption of a national rural
     development plan to supplement the EU’s IPARD support to Turkey.

     Only limited progress can be reported on quality policy and organic farming. As regards the
     former, a new law on geographical indications has been adopted. On organic farming, Turkey
     has taken further measures to improve the certification and control system.

     ‘Agriculture and rural development’ is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions
     on Turkey adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December



EN                                                 58                                                   EN
      2006 and endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions
     remain in place on the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in
     Cyprus or whose last port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to implement
     fully the acquis relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     There has been limited progress towards alignment with the acquis. Agricultural support
     policies showed only minor transition towards the CAP, following the significant divergent
     trend reported in recent years. Initial steps have been taken for the development of an
     integrated administration and control system. However, the failure to fully remove unjustified
     technical barriers to trade in bovine products and the continued delays in the accreditation of
     the structures to use the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for Rural Development
     represent significant shortcomings. Similarly, further progress is required on agricultural
     statistics, the farm accountancy data network, quality policy and organic farming.

     4.12.   Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy

     Substantial progress has been made towards transposition and implementation of the food
     safety acquis. The Framework Law on veterinary services, plant health, food and feed has
     been adopted. Turkey also prepared a detailed strategy for the transposition, implementation
     and enforcement of the acquis.

     In the area of veterinary policy, some progress was observed towards transposition and
     implementation of the acquis. Legislative alignment in the area of import control systems is
     still incomplete. Construction of three land and two seaport border inspection posts (BIPs) has
     been completed, but they are not yet fully functioning. Problems in directing consignments
     from Ataturk Airport to Sabiha Gokcen Airport remain unresolved and the BIP at Sabiha
     Gokcen Airport in Istanbul is still not fully functional.

     Turkey pursued efforts to bring the system for identification and registration of bovines and
     their movements fully into line with the acquis. The system has been strengthened to allow an
     effective cross-checking system with off and on movement notifications. The administrative
     capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) has been improved
     through information and training activities for staff and stakeholders. Implementation of
     identification and registration of ovine and caprine animals has started across the whole
     country. Implementation of systems for identification and registration of animals constitutes a
     key element for the accession negotiations in this chapter. Turkey has made no progress as
     regards control of commercial movements of pet animals.

     Turkey’s efforts in the area of combating animal diseases have continued, with foot and
     mouth disease (FMD) still being the main focus. However, the FMD contingency plan has not
     yet been adopted and the regulation on the control of FMD has not entered into force.
     Turkey’s intensive FMD vaccination programme accompanied by strict animal movement
     measures between Thrace and Anatolia has been implemented. Nevertheless, the number of
     FMD outbreaks has increased substantially in Anatolia. Thrace has been recognised by the
     World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as FMD-free with vaccination. The regulation
     concerning the control of rabies has not yet entered into force. No avian influenza outbreaks
     occurred in the reporting period and MARA continued implementing awareness campaigns
     and simulation exercises. Turkey made no progress as regards transmissible spongiform
     encephalopathy (TSE). Timely notification of animal diseases by Turkey has continued under



EN                                                 59                                                  EN
      its international obligations. Control and eradication of animal diseases, in particular FMD
     and TSE, as well as notification of animal diseases are key elements for the accession
     negotiations in this chapter.

     Procedures have been improved regarding the implementation and follow-up of the national
     residue monitoring plan and the control of veterinary medicinal products. However, no
     progress can be reported concerning deficiencies of laboratories and the inclusion of all
     substances.

     The current system for financing veterinary inspections and controls is not in line with the
     acquis. No progress has been observed as regards import requirements for live animals and
     animal products to bring the system into line with EU rules. The de facto beef ban was
     partially lifted (See also Chapter 11). Turkey has made no progress on zootechnical issues or
     on animal welfare, the latter being a key element for the accession negotiations in this chapter.

     As regards placing on the market of food and feed and animal by-products, limited
     progress can be reported. The hygiene package, a key element for the accession negotiations
     in this chapter, has not yet been transposed. Hygiene guidelines have been prepared and their
     implementation has started in some sectors. Risk-based inspections and controls are being
     implemented. A food safety information network system has become partially operational.
     The national rapid alert system for food and feed (RASFF) has been improved. The number of
     notifications received, particularly on aflatoxins and certain pesticide residues remained high.
     The Law on the restructuring of MARA has not been adopted. Intensive training programmes
     have led to improvements in administrative capacity. Annual inspection and monitoring
     programmes have been implemented. The classification of agri-food and animal by-products
     establishments has been completed in line with the acquis. However, no significant action has
     been taken to bring these establishments into line with EU requirements, which is a key
     element for the accession negotiations in this chapter.

     Concerning food safety rules, legislative alignment and implementation have further
     advanced on labelling, presentation and advertising, food additives and purity criteria,
     extraction solvents, quick frozen foodstuffs, food for particular nutritional uses, irradiated
     food and mineral waters. As regards contaminants, a communiqué concerning the methods of
     sampling and analysis for the official control of levels of dioxins and dioxin-like PCBs in
     certain foodstuffs has entered into force.

     Turkey has not completed transposition in the area of flavourings, food supplements and
     novel food. The Law on biosafety and two implementing regulations have entered into force.
     However, further alignment in this area is still required. Limited progress has been observed
     in the area of food contact materials. A regulation relating to materials and articles made of
     regenerated cellulose film intended to come into contact with foodstuffs has entered into
     force.

     No progress can be reported with regard to specific rules for feed.

     Some progress on phytosanitary policy has been achieved, with the main focus on the area
     of plant protection products (PPPs). The control system in this area has been further
     strengthened by providing training sessions on prescription, certification and the use of PPPs.
     Alignment has further improved on banned active substances. The use of certain pesticides,
     i.e. amitraz on pears, oxamyl on peppers, tomatoes and cucumbers, has been banned. A
     regulation concerning the marking of wood packaging materials as a plant health measure has
     entered into force. Implementation of a pilot-scale plant passport system has not yet started.


EN                                                  60                                                   EN
      Progress in the area of seed and propagating materials remained very limited. The variety
     registration and seed certification software system has still not become fully operational. No
     developments can be reported on the implementation of international phytosanitary
     agreements.

     Conclusion

     Progress has been achieved on all key elements for the accession negotiations in this chapter.
     The adoption of the Framework Law on veterinary services, plant health, food and feed has
     contributed significantly to Turkey’s alignment process in the area of food safety, veterinary
     and phytosanitary policy. However, the restructuring of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
     Affairs has not taken place yet. The adoption of a complete alignment strategy should
     facilitate transposition and implementation of the relevant acquis in this area. However,
     further efforts are still necessary for the alignment process.

     4.13.   Chapter 13: Fisheries

     There has been no substantial progress in alignment with the fisheries acquis. The revised
     Law on Fisheries and the Law on restructuring of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
     Affairs (MARA) has not yet been adopted.
     Some progress has been made in the area of resource and fleet management. The fisheries
     information system (FIS) has been improved to include recording of fishing vessels and
     commercial fishermen, special fishing permits, monitoring of blue-fin tuna (BFT), baby clam
     quotas and anchovy fishing. Further improvement is needed on collection of catch and
     landing data.

     Turkey completed building and equipping two new fisheries port offices, thereby increasing
     the total number to 36. Some progress can be reported as regards the administrative capacity
     of MARA. However, technical capacity needs to be built for stock assessment and data
     collection.

     There has been some progress in the field of inspection and control. MARA circulated
     implementing instructions to meet the requirements of the Council Regulation on illegal,
     unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing. Catch certificates and re-export certificates are
     issued for products to be exported to the EU. These products are also monitored and the data
     on their catch and sale are cross-checked in the FIS. All vessels over 15 m in length have
     started using automatic identification system (AIS) devices. All BFT vessels have been
     monitored by the satellite based vessel monitoring system.

     Further improvement is necessary with regard to fisheries control and measures to ensure
     sustainability of the fish stocks.

     No progress has been made on structural action, market policy and state aid.

     Turkey has not concluded any new international agreements but there has been some
     progress as regards the implementation of International Commission for the Conservation of
     Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) decisions. The number of authorised BFT vessels has been reduced
     from 57 to 18 and an individual quota system has been applied to distribute the total quota
     allocated to Turkey by the ICCAT. The ICCAT regional observer scheme has been introduced
     and ICCAT observers have been deployed to all BFT farms and authorised vessels. Fishing




EN                                                61                                                  EN
      periods are aligned with ICCAT requirements for BFT and swordfish. Further efforts are
     required to comply with the requirements of the multi-annual recovery plan for Eastern BFT.

     ‘Fisheries’ is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted by the
     Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by the
     European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on the
     free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or whose last port
     of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to implement fully the acquis relating
     to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     Overall, some progress has been made on resource and fleet management, inspection and
     control and implementation of international agreements. Further progress needs to be made on
     legislative alignment, administrative structures and market policy, structural action and state
     aid.

     4.14.    Chapter 14: Transport policy

     Some progress has been made in the area of road transport. Turkey became a party to the
     European Agreement on the international carriage of dangerous goods by road (ADR) on 22
     February 2010. However, the institutional and technical capacity of the directorate general for
     land transport (DGLT) for implementing the ADR remains limited. 26 additional inspection
     stations for the weight and dimensions of commercial vehicles were built in 2010. In January
     2010, Turkey appointed the Ministry of Transport (MoT) as the national authority charged
     with establishing a digital tachograph system (DTS). The MoT has delegated its tasks to the
     Union of Chambers of Commerce (TOBB) via a protocol. The implementing legistlation
     concerning the use of tachograph devices on vehicles providing international transport
     services entered into force on 21 May 2010 and first user card was issued in September 2010.
     The regulation is in line with Council Regulation 3821/85/EEC and the European Agreement
     concerning the work of crews of vehicles engaged in international road transport (AETR).

     On road transport, legislative alignment regarding driving and rest hours of drivers by the
     Ministry of Labour and Social Security is slow. Further work is required, especially in order
     to align with the new legislative packages adopted by the European Union after 2007.
     Technical and human resources capacity is not on a par with the level of legislative alignment.

     Rail transport is the only transport sub-sector where no progress has so far taken place.
     Preparedness in this sector remains at a very early stage.

     There is no inland waterway transport in Turkey.

     Good progress can be reported in the area of air transport. An EU-Turkey horizontal
     aviation agreement, which will constitute a new legal basis for relations in the aviation field, is
     at a final stage. Turkey has declared its willingness to be integrated in the aviation
     architecture that will emerge from the single european sky initiative. Preparations to draw up
     a pre-accession strategy for the aviation sector are at an early stage. The directorate-general
     for civil aviation (DGCA) has improved the technical capacity of its human resources through
     an active training policy which calls for systematisation of curricula and better training
     facilities.




EN                                                   62                                                    EN
      The DGCA extended the scope of the regulation on carriage of liquids on airplanes to include
     all international airports. It finalised a circular on passenger rights which is undergoing
     stakeholder consultation with the aviation industry. The DGCA also issued a regulation on
     safety assessment of national and foreign aircraft (SAFA – SANA). Despite widespread use in
     practice, DGCA still has not issued a regulation on computerised reservation systems.

     Air traffic management is still suffering from a lack of regional cooperation. The lack of
     communications between air traffic control centres in Turkey and the Republic of Cyprus is
     seriously compromising air safety in the Nicosia flight information region. A technical
     solution has been submitted by the Commission and Eurocontrol to the parties and the
     International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) for further consideration. No agreement has
     so far been reached between the parties.

     In the field of maritime transport, some progress can be reported, particularly on the
     strengthening of institutional capacity. The undersecretariat for maritime affairs (UMA) has
     prepared a pre-accession sector strategy and identified priority policy areas for short-term
     actions. The directorate general for coastal safety and salvage operations established a long-
     range identification and tracking system (LRIT) and the Turkish national LRIT data centre
     integrated with the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) and the International Mobile
     Satellite Organisation (IMSO). Also a national assistance, search and rescue automation
     system called Yakamos was put into operation in October 2009. These investments
     substantially enhanced UMA’s technical capacity for monitoring, pollution estimation and
     integrated planning in coastal zones. Vessel traffic monitoring information systems (VTMIS)
     for the ports of Izmit, Izmir, Mersin and Iskenderun are being installed. UMA also initiated a
     comprehensive annual training programme on oil pollution preparedness and emergency
     response. However, actual physical capacity for pollution prevention and emergency response
     is limited. The regulation on seafarers was amended on 28 May 2010: graduates of the
     military navy schools are required to complete training and take the seafarer exam in
     accordance with the Convention on standards of training, certification and watch keeping
     (STCW).

     The regulation on reception of waste from ships and waste control was amended and specific
     references to Marpol Annexes were made in relation to the definition of waste. Turkey
     became a party to protocol on limitation on liability for maritime claims (LLMC 1996). UMA
     issued an administrative instruction to comply with the anti-fouling systems convention while
     the ratification process is ongoing. There was no progress in becoming a party to SOLAS-78,
     SOLAS-88, the Convention on facilitation of international maritime traffic (FAL), the
     International Convention on the control of harmful anti-fouling systems on ships (AFS) and
     Marpol Annexes III and IV.

     The detention rate of Turkish vessels was 4.2% in 2009 (5.6% during the first half of 2010)
     compared to 2.2% for the EU average in 2009. Turkey is on the white list of the Paris
     Memorandum of Understanding. Alignment in the maritime safety area is at a good level but
     the third EU Maritime Package adopted on 11 March 2009 amends some of the legislation
     with which Turkey has already aligned.

     No particular development in the area of combined transport and satellite navigation can
     be reported.

     ‘Transport policy’ is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted
     by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed



EN                                                63                                                  EN
      by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on
     the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or where the
     last port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to implement fully the acquis
     relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     Except for the railways sector, some progress has been achieved towards alignment of the
     transport sector. Legislative alignment has reached an advanced level in the aviation,
     maritime and road sectors. However, some recent legislative packages adopted by the EU
     amending the acquis require additional alignment efforts. No progress has been made
     regarding rail market opening and safety. The lack of communications between air traffic
     control centres in Turkey and the Republic of Cyprus continues to seriously compromise air
     safety. In the maritime sector, no progress has been made on becoming a party to international
     conventions. The implementation capacity is limited, particularly for road transport and for
     prevention of pollution and emergency response in the maritime area. Human resources and
     technical capacity to implement the acquis remain limited.

     4.15.   Chapter 15: Energy

     Progress can be reported in the field of security of supply. Turkey completed the ratification
     procedure of the intergovernmental agreement on the Nabucco gas pipeline in August 2010.
     As the next step project support agreements can now be concluded between governments. In
     June 2010 Turkey and Azerbaijan reached agreement on gas pricing and gas transit through
     Turkey. The agreement for the construction of the Samsun-Ceyhan oil pipeline was signed
     between the Turkish, Italian and Russian companies. There have been few developments as
     regards oil stocks. The planned oil stockholding agency to facilitate oil stockholding
     arrangements remains to be established.

     Regarding the internal energy market, good progress can be reported on electricity. With
     new private sector investments undertaken, Turkey’s installed capacity increased by 2,800
     MW and private investments in the energy sector amounted to €3.1 billion in 2009.
     Implementation of the new balancing and settlement regulation started, thereby launching
     modern electricity market trading practices. Sales through the balancing and settlement
     system correspond to around 75% of total electricity sales volume. The electricity market
     licensing regulation was amended. The amendment makes completion of the environmental
     impact assessment procedure a precondition for granting generating licences in the electricity
     sector. The threshold for eligible consumers was further reduced to 100,000 kWh, equivalent
     to opening 63% of the market. Privatisation of distribution assets through block sales of 100%
     of shares continued. Three private companies began operating in the electricity distribution
     sector. The privatisation process for five more distribution regions was completed but assets
     have not been transferred to the new owners yet. According to the revised strategy paper, the
     government plans to complete privatisation of distribution assets in 2010.

     Regarding the natural gas market, little progress can be reported. The threshold for eligible
     consumers was reduced to 800,000 m3/year from 1 million m3/year. By April 2010, 66 cities
     in Turkey were connected to the natural gas grid. Two companies started spot LNG imports in
     2009. No developments can be reported regarding the gas release programme or the
     unbundling of BOTAS to meet the requirements of the Natural Gas Market Law.




EN                                                 64                                                  EN
      Good progress can be reported in the field of renewable energy. The electricity licensing
     regulation was amended to tackle the large number of wind licence applications that were
     submitted to the energy market regulatory authority in 2007. Private sector interest in
     renewable energy investments grew strongly. By the end of 2009, around 1,000 MW of
     additional renewable installed capacity was developed by the private sector. By the end of
     2009, Turkey was producing 19.6% of its electricity from renewable energy sources.
     Nevertheless, further efforts are needed in particular towards creating a stronger regulatory
     environment favourable for the use of renewable energy sources in all sectors required by the
     EU acquis.

     Regarding energy efficiency, further progress can be reported. The implementing regulation
     on energy performance of buildings came into force. By the end of 2009, 17 private sector
     companies and one professional chamber were authorised to provide energy efficiency
     services. Efforts to increase energy efficiency in the country could benefit from improvements
     in the capacity of the general directorate of electrical power resources survey and
     development administration as well as development of strategies to increase further awareness
     in this field.

     Regarding nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection limited progress can be
     reported. In October 2010, Turkey ratified its first agreement with Russia to establish and
     operate a nuclear power plant in Akkuyu on the Eastern Mediterranean coast with an installed
     capacity of 4,800 MW. In June 2010 the Turkish state-owned electricity generation company
     EUAS and Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) signed a protocol to build Turkey’s
     second nuclear power plant in Sinop, on the Black Sea coast. Improvements were made to the
     radioactive waste management unit at the Cekmece nuclear research and training centre,
     which still need to be assessed by the Commission. According to Turkey’s revised strategy
     paper on the electricity market and security of supply, Turkey plans to have 5% of its installed
     capacity from nuclear energy by the year 2023. The Turkish Atomic Energy Agency (TAEK)
     continues to perform both regulatory functions and its operational tasks.

     Compliance of the existing regulations with the EU acquis still needs to be demonstrated.
     Turkey does not participate in the IPA horizontal programme on nuclear safety and radiation
     protection, making an assessment of the level of transposition of the EU acquis very difficult.

     Turkey does not have a framework nuclear law to address the acquis requirements regarding
     nuclear safety and it has not acceded to the Joint Convention on the safety of spent fuel
     management and radioactive waste management. As a Contracting Party to the Convention on
     Nuclear Safety, Turkey is obliged to consult its neighbouring countries and the Euratom
     Community on nuclear power plants planned on its territory.

     Conclusion

     There has been good progress with regard to electricity, renewable energy and energy
     efficiency, as well as on security of supply. Developments in the fields of natural gas, nuclear
     energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection require further efforts.

     4.16.   Chapter 16: Taxation

     There has been limited progress in the area of indirect taxation. Turkey’s value added tax
     legislation is not fully in line with the acquis. The structure, exemptions, special schemes and
     application of reduced rates remain to be further aligned. Some progress can be reported with
     regard to excise duties. In line with the action plan adopted on 18 May 2009, Turkey


EN                                                 65                                                   EN
      abolished the Tobacco Fund levy imposed on processed tobacco as of 1 January 2010. This is
     a positive step towards full elimination of discriminatory practices in the taxation of tobacco.
     The Tobacco Fund sets a special duty on imported raw tobacco, which is not applicable to
     domestic products. Minimum excise tax amount and ad valorem on tobacco products were
     increased. However, discrepancies between the Turkish legislation and the acquis continue to
     exist in terms of the structure of the excise duty on tobacco and tobacco products. Turkish
     legislation lays down ad valorem rates and and minimum excise duty whereas it lacks the
     element of specific excise duties.

     With regard to alcoholic beverages, uneven progress can be reported. Specific duties are
     levied on alcoholic beverages, differentiated on the basis of the type of product instead of the
     alcoholic content. The levels set are higher for imported products than for comparable
     domestic ones. Turkey had reduced the differentials between these levels through a cabinet
     decree of April 2009 as part of an action plan adopted on 18 May 2009 setting clear mutually
     accepted milestones with a view to the gradual elimination of all discriminatory taxation.
     Other changes in the taxation of alcoholic beverages went in the right direction, such as the
     abolition of ad valorem duties on wine, which aligns the Turkish legislation with the EU
     acquis. However, in January and October the excise duty rate on alcoholic beverages was
     increased by 10% and 30% respectively across the board. Contradicting the action plan, this
     increased the differentials in absolute figures between the taxation of imported compared to
     domestic alcoholic beverages. Turkey needs to comply with the commitments in the action
     plan, which is a key requirement in the negotiations under this chapter. Turkey will need to
     introduce a duty-suspension regime for domestic movements and tax warehouses prior to
     membership.

     There is no progress to be reported on direct taxation. The Income Tax Law is under
     revision.

     Some progress can be reported in the field of administrative cooperation and mutual
     assistance. The revenue administration monitored the activities to be carried out by nine
     institutions in line with the action plan for combating the informal economy. The plan covers
     the period 2008-2010. Sharing the overall assessment of the action plan’s results with the
     public is crucial for ensuring transparency.

     Regarding operational capacity and computerisation, some progress has been achieved.
     The revenue administration kept up its efforts to increase voluntary compliance. The measures
     taken were aimed at simplifying procedures, enhancing enforcement as well as improving
     taxpayer services. The taxpayer call centre received three awards34 at the 2009 Istanbul call
     centres conference. The revenue administration developed a number of IT infrastructure
     projects such as VERIA (electronic database) and VEDOS (risk assessment system) as an
     extension of VEDOP (tax offices automation project). Automation of tax rulings has been a
     significant step in increasing the transparency and consistency of the Turkish tax legislation.

     Conclusion

     There has been some progress towards legislative alignment under this chapter, particularly in
     eliminating discriminatory practices in the taxation of tobacco, despite the remaining
     discrepancies with the acquis. Efforts to reinforce the tax administration, combat the informal
     economy and increase voluntary compliance were pursued. However, the increases in excise

     34
            Special award of the jury, best call centre manager, best customer representative.



EN                                                        66                                            EN
      duty on alcoholic beverages contradicted the action plan for eliminating the differentials
     between imported and domestic products. The realignment of the Turkish tax legislation with
     the commitments taken by Turkey in the context of the opening of Chapter taxation needs to
     be ensured without delay. Abolition of discriminatory practices in taxation is a key element
     for making further progress in the accession negotiations on this chapter. Hardly any progress
     can be reported on direct and indirect taxation. Overall preparedness in this chapter is
     moderately advanced.

     4.17.    Chapter 17: Economic and monetary union

     There has been some progress on monetary policy. The Central Bank announced an exit
     strategy for its monetary policy, which aims to gradually reduce the excess liquidity in the
     system. As a first step, the Bank increased the foreign currency reserve ratio for the banking
     sector from 9% to 9.5%. Turkey’s legislative alignment with the acquis remains partial in this
     area. The Central Bank’s statute does not fully ensure its independence. The government and
     the Central Bank jointly decide on the inflation target. The legislative framework (for
     example implementing regulations on the investor protection fund and on the operation of
     pension investment funds) contains provisions that are not in line with the prohibition of
     privileged access of the public sector to financial institutions. Overall the preparations in the
     field of monetary policy are well advanced.

     Some progress has been made on economic policy. Turkey is a member of G20, and
     coordination of economic policy in this forum has stepped up with all the other members,
     including with the EU. The authorities have been very active in reviving their economic
     relations with several countries in the region, in particular through visa exemption, trade
     facilitation and cooperation agreements. Privatisation activities in the energy sector gathered
     momentum, first in electricity distribution and then in generation. Turkey ended negotiations
     with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for a new stand-by arrangement. The authorities
     have been more active in working with international financial institutions (IFIs), particularly
     the European Investment Bank (EIB), the World Bank (WB), the European Bank for
     Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), while
     increasing their absorption capacity for new loans. Turkey’s 2010 budget aims to gradually
     reduce the budget deficit, particularly through increasing public revenues. Technical work for
     the adoption of a fiscal rule through new legislation to control the budget deficit in the
     medium term has been completed but the adoption of the draft law has been postponed.
     Turkey submitted its Pre-Accession Economic Programme (PEP) to the Commission in
     January 2010. Overall, in the field of economic policy the country is well advanced.

     Conclusion

     Some progress has been made on economic and monetary policy. The Central Bank started to
     implement an exit strategy for its anti-crisis monetary policy. The authorities have been very
     active in improving their economic relations within a G20 context, with the countries in the
     region, and have increased their cooperation with various international financial institutions.
     The legal framework is not fully in line with the acquis, with special reference to full
     independence of the Central Bank and the prohibition of privileged access of the public sector
     to financial institutions. Overall the preparations in the field of economic and monetary union
     are well on track.




EN                                                  67                                                   EN
      4.18.    Chapter 18: Statistics

     There has been progress in the area of statistical infrastructure. The Turkish national
     statistical institute (TurkStat) signed new cooperation protocols with the Ministry of
     Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) and the Ministry of Education. Cooperation among
     the main owners of administrative data on enterprises has greatly improved. These activities
     further reinforced the coordinating role and improved the administrative capacity of TurkStat.
     Preparations in this area are well advanced.

     Progress can be reported on classifications and registers. TurkStat further improved the
     business register. TurkStat and MARA started to work on establishing a statistical farm
     register and initiated a pilot study to that end. Turkey still needs to submit a detailed
     description of preparations for setting up the farm register and the methodology and
     organisational set-up for the collection of agriculture statistics which is a key element for the
     accession negotiations in this chapter. Preparations in this area are advanced.

     Good progress has been made on sector statistics. Preparations for the 2011 population and
     housing census are on track. As for national accounts, progress has been made on excessive
     deficit procedure statistics, outward foreign affiliates trade statistics and financial accounts for
     the government sector. Gross value added for the regions equivalent to NUTS level 2 was
     published for the years 2004 to 2006. TurkStat started publishing key labour force indicators
     at the provincial level, as well as seasonally adjusted figures. The results of the 2008 labour
     cost survey were published. Structural business statistics as well as short-term statistics were
     further improved. Regarding agriculture statistics, TurkStat started collecting monthly animal
     production data. Progress was made on environment statistics. Preparations in this area are
     advanced.

     Turkey has not yet submitted key national account indicators together with the methodology
     used, which is a key element for the accession negotiations in this chapter.

     Conclusion

     There has been good progress in the area of statistics. TurkStat further improved the
     coordination of the statistical system. Good progress has been made on the business register
     and on sector statistics. Further alignment is needed in particular in national accounts and in
     agriculture statistics, not least in the establishment of the statistical farm register. Turkey’s
     overall level of alignment with the acquis in statistics is advanced.

     4.19.    Chapter 19: Social policy and employment

     There has been no progress regarding transposition of the acquis on labour law. The Labour
     Law does not apply to certain sectors of the economy. The decision to set up a new
     department for disadvantaged groups in the Ministry of Labour and Social Security is a
     positive step. The labour inspection board35 remain to be strengthened in particular as regards
     staffing and cooperation with the social partners.
     Little progress has been made in the area of health and safety at work. Administrative
     capacity as well as the awareness level have increased, with the contribution of EU-funded
     actions. According to official statistics covering only registered workers, 72,963 occupational


     35
             The number of labour inspectors dealing with labour relations increased to 321.



EN                                                        68                                                EN
      accidents occurred in 2008, slightly less than in 2007. The numbers would be much higher if
     the informal sector were included. There has been no progress regarding transposition of the
     Framework Directive on health and safety at work. This is a major shortcoming for the
     implementation of legislation already transposed. The capacity of the labour inspection board,
     which is a priority in this area, continued to be strengthened through recruitment and training
     of additional staff. However, the number of labour inspectors remains very low compared to
     the size of the economy and the labour market36. Dramatic fatal occupational accidents in the
     mining and quarrying sectors have raised concerns over enforcement of legislation as well as
     the inspections carried out by public authorities37. Fatal ‘silicosis’ diseases caused by poor
     working conditions in jeans sandblasting workshops continued to occur.

     There has been some progress in the area of social dialogue, in particular in the public sector.
     Amendments were made to the Constitution granting the right to collective bargaining and
     collective agreements to civil servants and other public employees and making disciplinary
     decisions against civil servants subject to judicial review. Amendments also included lifting
     the ban on certain strikes38, removing the ban on membership of more than one trade union at
     the same time and in the same branch of activity, and repealing the restriction to one
     collective agreement at the same workplace for the same time. Furthermore, with the
     constitutional amendments, the Economic and Social Council has become a constitutional
     body, to be consulted by the government for policy making in the economic and social fields.
     Furthermore, the Prime Minister’s Office issued a circular aiming to improve the situation of
     civil servants, including facilitating the exercise of trade union rights in the public sector.
     However, the legal framework to which the Constitution refers in view of regulating the rights
     to negotiate, to organise collective actions for workers, employees and civil servants remains
     restrictive and needs to be brought into line with EU standards and ILO Conventions. An ILO
     high-level bipartite mission to Turkey consisting of the employers’ and workers’
     spokespersons from the Committee on the application of standards was unable to note any
     measurable progress towards the adoption of relevant legislation. The government has
     attempted to address some key issues such as ensuring the right to freedom of association and
     collective bargaining at workplace level in a new draft law on trade union rights in the private
     sector, which failed to receive the support of the social partners. The number of workers
     covered by collective labour agreements remains very low39. The work of the main social
     dialogue mechanisms (Tripartite Consultative Board, Economic and Social Council) and the
     capacity of social partners needs further strengthening. (See Political criteria — Labour rights
     and trade unions). The constitutional amendment package did not introduce the right to strike
     for civil servants.

     There has been some progress on employment policy. Turkey is preparing its national
     employment strategy. Job creation incentives announced in the midst of the financial crisis
     were prolonged. There is a decreasing trend in unemployment compared to 2009. The Turkish
     Employment Agency (ISKUR) kept up its efforts to register unemployed and deliver services

     36
            The number of labour inspectors dealing with Health and safety issues is 314. The total number of
            labour inspectors is 635, i.e; 7% more than last year. However, in the same period, the number of
            people in employment increased by 1.5 million.
     37
            Big fatal accidents occurred in Bursa, Mustafakemalpaşa (19 deaths in December 2009), Balıkesir,
            Odaköy (17 deaths in February 2010), Zonguldak, Karadon (30 deaths in May 2010), Edirne and Keşan
            (3 deaths in July 2010).
     38
            Politically motivated strikes and lockouts, solidarity strikes and lockouts, general strikes and lockouts,
            occupation of work premises, labour go-slows, reduced productivity and other forms of resistance.
     39
            The collective agreements concluded in 2008 and 2009 cover a total of 767,582 workers. The total
            number of people in employment is around 23,5 million.



EN                                                        69                                                             EN
      to them. The active labour market measures have been significantly extended40. However, the
     coverage rate of unemployment benefit is too low. Only 6% of the unemployed received
     benefits from the fund in March 2010. The overall administrative capacity of Turkey’s public
     employment service remains weak. Labour force participation and employment rates are
     low41. The south-east region has the lowest participation rates42. The youth unemployment
     remains high but has shown a decreasing trend in the first 2 quarters of 201043. The
     percentage of undeclared workers has followed a downward trend after reaching a peak in
     June 2009. However, 44.8% of the people in employment are not registered with the social
     security system and hence are deprived of the protection of labour law and pension rights. The
     work to combat against undeclared work intensified, especially through increased
     coordination and cooperation between the SSI and the other public and private institutions.
     336,838 undeclared workers were identified with this means. However the inspection capacity
     remains insufficient compared to the wide scope of the informal economy. There has been no
     progress regarding finalisation of the joint assessment paper (JAP) on employment priority
     policies.

     There has been some progress in preparations for the European Social Fund (ESF). The
     operating structure established under the Ministry of Labour and Social Security, which is
     responsible for the management of the human resources development operational programme
     (HRD OP) under IPA component IV, has continued to increase capacity. After all the formal
     requirements had been met, implementation of the HRD OP started with the launch of the first
     award procedures and signature of the first contracts. However, major delays have occurred in
     the evaluation process and signing of the first contracts which took place only in May 2010.
     Implementation of operations currently launched needs to be speeded up to prevent the risk of
     substantial loss of funds. Monitoring and evaluation of programmes needs strengthening.

     There has been little progress in the field of social inclusion. An amendment to the
     Constitution paves the way for positive discrimination for children, the elderly and disabled
     people. Turkey has no comprehensive policy framework to address poverty. The percentage
     of the population at risk of poverty remains high, and children continue to face a
     disproportionate risk of poverty. Poverty among the working population remains a concern,
     especially among seasonal workers, those in subsistence agriculture and undeclared workers.
     An action plan has been adopted by the Economic Coordination Committee, aiming to
     establish links between social services and public employment services44. The government
     has lifted budget-related staff limitations on employment of persons with disabilities in public
     institutions45. However, national Turkish institutions promoting social inclusion remain


     40
            The number of beneficiaries increased from 30,000 in 2008 to 200,000 in 2009.
     41
            The figures are 50% and 44,7% in June 2010, showing an improvement compared to last year but still
            very low compared to EU average..
     42
            According to TurkStat 2008 figures, participation rates are 26.9% for Diyarbakır, 27.2% for Siirt and
            29.8% for Şırnak. However, in 2009 the highest increase in employment rate was registered in the
            south-east.
     43
            Youth unemployment rate decreased to 19.1% in June 2010 compared to 23.7% in the same period of
            2009.
     44
            Based on this action plan, social assistance recipients, who are of working age and able to work, will be
            registered in the public employment agency database and encouraged to receive relevant employment
            services.
     45
            In January 2010, out of 48,943 public sector posts allocated by law to people with disabilities
            (accounting for 3% of all public sector posts), only 14,325 could be filled due to budgetary limitations.
            Now that an exemption has been granted, lifting budget-related restrictions on the employment of
            people with disabilities, the recruitment process for the remaining posts has started.



EN                                                        70                                                            EN
      dispersed and weak. Further efforts are needed to increase the employability of persons with
     disabilities in both the public and private sector. No progress has been made towards
     finalisation of the Memorandum on social protection and social inclusion (JIM).
     There has been little progress in the field of social protection. A circular was issued by the
     Prime Minister’s Office addressing the conditions of seasonal migrant agricultural workers
     with regard, among other things, to housing, access to education, health and social security. A
     free helpline number (144) regarding social assistance services has been launched. The
     percentage of people covered by the social security system remained at 80%. The draft law on
     social assistance and payments without premiums is still pending. Turkey reports a large
     deficit in the pension system, which has widened considerably in the wake of the crisis. More
     efforts are needed to extend the coverage of the pension system to undeclared workers and to
     encourage those covered to work longer in the formal sector, Access to primary health
     services and extension of the general health insurance scheme have improved. Staff shortages
     remain an acute challenge for the healthcare system.
     There has been no progress towards transposition of the acquis in the field of anti-
     discrimination. The Labour Law is not applicable to the period prior to conclusion of a
     labour contract. There is no definition in Turkish legislation of direct and indirect
     discrimination. The acquis covering discrimination on grounds of racial or ethnic origin,
     religion or belief, disability, age and sexual orientation is not transposed.
     Some progress can be reported in the field of equal opportunities. The constitutional
     amendment stipulates that measures taken to achieve substantive equality between men and
     women cannot be deemed contrary to the principle of equality. A circular was issued by the
     Prime Minister’s Office to mainstream gender issues into implementation of, among other
     things, employment-related legislation and policies, workplace inspections, strategic plans
     and in-service training. The parliamentary Commission on equal opportunities for men and
     women continued its work by preparing reports and holding consultations with relevant
     parties. Women’s employment and labour force participation rates46 remain lower than all the
     EU Member States and the lowest among OECD countries. Women are disproportionally
     affected by informal work conditions and unpaid work in agriculture. The provision of
     affordable child care is insufficient. The gender pay gap persists. Legislation and policies
     aiming to harmonise work and family life are yet to be adopted. Efforts to implement the
     national action plan for 2008-2013 on gender equality lack sufficient human and financial
     resources (see Political criteria — Economic and social rights).

     Conclusion

     Overall, Turkey made some progress in the field of social policy and employment. The
     constitutional amendment package brings significant improvements in the area of social
     dialogue in the public sector and paves the way for positive discrimination towards women,
     children, elderly and disabled people. However, Turkey’s alignment in the field of social
     policy and employment remains limited. A comprehensive reform of trade union legislation
     aimed at achieving full trade union rights in line with EU standards and ILO conventions is
     still pending. The constitutional amendment package did not introduce the right to strike for
     civil servants. The Turkish labour market continues to feature large-scale undeclared work
     and low female employment rates. The limited scope of the labour law and enforcement of the
     health and safety legislation are areas of concern. A general policy framework to combat


     46
            22.3% and 26% respectively.



EN                                                 71                                                  EN
      poverty remains to be established. The administrative capacity for effective implementation of
     the acquis in the field of social policy and employment needs to be strengthened.

     4.20.    Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy

     Turkey made further progress with regard to enterprise and industrial policy principles.
     Turkey finalised a revised draft industrial strategy document and action plan covering the
     period 2010-2013, which now is awaiting adoption.

     The Coordination Council for improvement of the investment environment (YOIKK) adopted
     an action plan for 2010. Efforts are continuing to systematically monitor and evaluate
     strategies and action plans that have been adopted, through e.g. the quarterly reports issued on
     the YOIKK action plans and the assessment of the SME strategy and action plan. A medium-
     term economic programme was announced for 2010-2012 covering areas related to industrial
     policy. . A new evaluation board for the export-oriented production strategy was established
     on 12 March 2010, bringing together the ministries, related public organisations and the
     private sector. Turkey has joined the Small Business Act implementation process together
     with the Western Balkan countries.

     Some progress was made with respect to enterprise and industrial policy instruments. New
     loan programmes including a credit guarantee scheme were extended by the Small and
     Medium-sized Industry Development Organisation (KOSGEB) following the adoption of new
     pieces of legislation on the management of KOSGEB funds, in particular on sectoral and
     regional priorities. KOSGEB signed a protocol with the Development Agencies and the State
     Planning Organisation in order to establish joint support programmes for SMEs. Business
     incubation centres were established in five regions. Most of the activities scheduled under the
     SME action plan have been completed. R&D spending continued to increase while the share
     of the private sector greatly surpassed that of the public sector. The participation of Turkey in
     the EU Entrepreneurship and Innovation programme, and in particular in the Enterprise
     Europe Network, is a positive development. No progress can be noted towards completing
     alignment with EU Directive 2000/35 on combating late payments in commercial
     transactions.

     Some progress has been made in sector policies. The Ministry of Industry and Trade prepared
     a strategy and action plan on tradesmen and craftsmen including measures such as improving
     access to finance, support for clustering, entrepreneurship, innovation and university
     cooperation. Roadmaps were prepared for the chemicals, iron and steel and automotive
     sectors. No further developments can be reported in the national restructuring programme for
     the Turkish steel industry following the revision made last year. Formal verification of the
     steel industry restructuring programme by the state aid monitoring authority is called for once
     that authority is established.
     Conclusion

     Turkey has made further progress in this chapter, in terms of finalisation of the industrial
     strategy and action plan covering the period 2010-2013, wider availability of enterprise and
     industrial policy instruments and adoption of sectoral strategies and roadmaps. Some limited
     improvements can be reported in the business environment and in terms of continued
     monitoring and evaluation efforts. Overall, Turkey maintains a sufficient level of alignment
     with the acquis in the field of enterprise and industrial policy.




EN                                                  72                                                   EN
      4.21.   Chapter 21: Trans-European networks

     Good progress was made in the area of transport networks. The Ministry of Transport
     finalised the technical document on the future Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) in
     Turkey and the priority projects of European interest on the TEN-T Network. The technical
     document constitutes a sound basis for further negotiations, as confirmed by sites visit. In the
     meantime, Turkey has effectively utilised pre-accession assistance to continue technical
     preparations for transport infrastructure projects on the core transport network. However, a
     master plan for long-term investment has not yet been prepared.

     Some progress can be noted in the area of energy networks. The ratification procedure of the
     intergovernmental agreement on the Nabucco gas pipeline was completed in August 2010. As
     the next step, project support agreements can now be concluded between the governments.
     Nabucco is an important strategic step towards closer energy cooperation between the EU,
     Turkey and other countries in the region and remains one of the highest energy security
     priorities of the EU.

     Preparations continue to bring into operation the Turkey-Greece-Italy Interconnector (ITGI)
     natural gas pipeline.

     As regards electricity networks, after completion of all necessary studies and tests, trial
     synchronous operation with ENTSO-E (European Network of Transmission System Operators
     for Electricity) began on 18 September 2010. The interconnection with Iran, a 400 kV link
     that was operating at 154 kV, has been upgraded to 220 kV. Studies to upgrade the Georgia
     link have also started.

     No progress can be reported in the area of telecommunications networks.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made progress in the area of Trans-European networks. In particular, it has
     facilitated technical discussions under the future Trans-European Network for Transport and
     reached an advanced stage in negotiations. Some progress can also be reported on energy
     networks.

     4.22.   Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments

     Some progress was made with regard to the legislative framework. During the previous
     reporting period the Prime Minister’s Office issued a circular on the official appointment of
     institutions under IPA, which has been completed in the current period with the including
     formal appointment of the strategic coordinator under components III and IV

     Progress was made with the institutional framework. The technical committee established
     by the State Planning Organisation (SPO), as the IPA strategic coordinator, meets quarterly to
     support the smooth implementation of all four operational programmes (on transport, the
     environment, regional competitiveness and human resources development). The SPO is
     working on the establishment of a regional development committee which will coordinate
     regional development policies among central institutions and between the local authorities.

     Progress was made as regards administrative capacity.




EN                                                 73                                                   EN
      Training and technical assistance to strengthen central institutions involved in IPA
     implementation has continued and the setting-up of management and control systems has
     further advanced. Concerns remain about the capacity of the institutions to effectively and
     efficiently manage IPA funds. Use of funds is marked by delays in contracting and there is a
     serious risk that not all funds allocated can be absorbed and that the impact and results are less
     than anticipated. High staff turnover in the DIS institutions, lack of coordination among
     institutions and delays in the preparations of the operating structures in line ministries to take
     over duties of contracting and payments from the central finance and contracts unit (CFCU)
     have aggravated these concerns. The capacity of the CFCU needs to be urgently adjusted to
     the new timetable to ensure the full and sound use of EU funds allocated. To address these
     risks, supervision by the NAO needs to be strengthened, urgent measures have to be taken and
     capacity needs to be brought rapidly into line with the amount of funds under implementation.
     Administrative capacity at regional level remains weak. The regional development committee
     (RDC), which aims to coordinate regional development policies among central institutions
     and between the local level and the centre is envisaged as a main element of Turkey’s new
     regional policy and is scheduled to be established in 2010, but no concrete developments can
     be reported yet.

     Some progress was made with regard to programming and programme implementation.
     Improvements have been made in building up project pipelines for IPA, particularly in the
     environment, regional competitiveness and employment operational programmes. This should
     improve absorption of funds in the medium term. In some minor revisions of the OPs
     budgetary and timing aspects as well as geographical targeting were fine-tuned. As
     implementation is at an early stage more comprehensive conclusions on the impact and results
     can only be drawn later on.

     In the area of monitoring and evaluation, some progress was made. Working groups
     between the IPA operating structures and the state planning organisation have been active,
     and progress was made in setting up the integrated management information system (MIS).
     Sectoral monitoring committees for all IPA components continued to meet on schedule.

     In the area of financial management and control, some progress was made. However,
     capacity building and preparations for conferral of management within the operating
     structures are lagging behind and the timetable for enabling these structures to take over
     financial management and control responsibilities from the CFCU could not be adhered to, so
     that the takeover had to be postponed until 2011 in the case of Transport and Human
     Resources Development and until 2012 in the case of Regional Competitiveness. As a result,
     the co-operation agreements with the CFCU need to be extended beyond the current deadline
     of 31 December 2010.

     Conclusion

     Progress, albeit uneven, was made in this area. In particular, the legislative and institutional
     framework for implementation of IPA components III and IV has been finalised, involvement
     of local and regional stakeholders in preparing the project pipeline has been improved and the
     DAs are well on the way to becoming fully operational. In order to prepare effectively for the
     use of structural instruments (Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund) upon accession,
     administrative capacity of central, regional and local institutions should be reinforced.
     Moreover, pre-accession funds have to be used more effectively and the absorption capacity
     of key institutions, namely the CFCU and Operating Structures in line Ministries needs to
     increase in order to demonstrate readiness to absorb larger amounts of EU funds.



EN                                                  74                                                    EN
      4.23.    Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights

     There has been progress on the judiciary (see also under political criteria – part I of the
     report).

     As regards independence of the judiciary, the permanent membership of the High Council of
     Judges and Prosecutors increased from seven to twenty two: in addition to representatives of
     the Court of Cassation and the Council of State, the new membership includes representatives
     of first instance judges, the Justice Academy, law faculties and lawyers.

     The constitutional amendments provide that decisions of the High Council dismissing
     members of the judiciary from the profession are open to judicial review. A Secretariat
     General is established under the High Council, providing it with professional and secretarial
     support; the High Council appoints judges and prosecutors to this Secretariat.

     Judicial inspectors, who are responsible for evaluating the performance of judges and
     prosecutors, report to the High Council and no longer to the Ministry. These reforms meet
     priorities of the Accession Partnership and the Progress Reports. However, the Minister is still
     the president of the High Council; albeit with reduced competence (the Minister cannot join
     the meetings of any of the three chambers of the Council ). In addition, the investigative
     authority of the High Council is subjected to the approval of the Minister of Justice in his
     capacity as president of the Council.

     The Semdinli case is still pending (see the section on civilian oversight of security forces).
     The dismissal of the civilian prosecutor previously in charge of the case, together with the
     handling of the case to date, raised questions about the independence of the High Council47.

     With regard to impartiality, constitutional provisions allowing military courts to try civilians
     have been taken out of the Constitution and new provisions prohibit such trials explicitly.
     Cases related to offences against the security of the state, constitutional order and the
     functioning of this order are to be tried in civilian courts. This followed the annulment by the
     Constitutional Court, in January 2010, of provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code allowing
     civilian courts to try members of the military in cases of organized crimes and crimes against
     the State on the basis that these were in conflict with the then constitutional provisions.

     The Constitutional Court, further to the adoption of the constitutional amendments, is
     composed of seventeen members nominated by both the President of the Republic and
     Parliament, while no substitute membership is foreseen. However, two of the judges continue
     to be military judges. As constitutional jurisprudence in a democratic system is a civilian
     matter, the presence of military judges is questionable. In addition, military judges might
     return to the military justice system when their term in the Constitutional Court expires, which
     could raise questions about their impartiality as Constitutional Court judges.

     Senior members of the judiciary and of the military made statements that could put the
     impartiality of the judiciary at risk in important cases.



     47
             The civilian prosecutor in this case published the indictment in 2006. It included accusations against
             high-ranking military commanders. The general Staff criticised the indictment and urged those bearing
             constitutional responsibility to take action. The High Council of Judges and prosecutors took the
             dismissal decision in April 2006.



EN                                                        75                                                          EN
      With regard to the efficiency of the judiciary, the use of information technology in the judicial
     system has accelerated judicial procedures and facilitated third party access to judicial
     proceedings. The number of judicial staff continued to increase. On 20 September there were
     a total of 11,394 judges and prosecutors (11,121 judges and prosecutors on 1 May 2009).
     Progress has been made as regards juvenile justice (see the section on children's rights).

     However, the overall number of vacancies for judges and prosecutors remains significant, i.e.
     3,299 on 20 September 2010 (3,875 on 1 May 2009). The regional courts of appeal are not
     operational yet. By law, they should have been in operation by June 2007.

     The quality of the investigation in some high profile cases continued to raise concerns. No
     progress can be reported as regards the need to improve the work of the police and the
     gendarmerie but, also, the working relationship between the police and the gendarmerie, on
     the one hand, and the judiciary, on the other.

     There has been no progress on the introduction of a mediation system into civil justice.
     Reconciliation, introduced into the criminal justice system in 2005, is not used effectively.
     Provision of legal aid is inadequate in terms of either its coverage or the quality of services
     provided. The implementation of pre-trial detention is not limited to circumstances where it is
     strictly necessary in the public interest. This adds to the overcrowding in prisons, where more
     than half of the inmates await trial. The probation system is not used to its full extent by
     judges.

     There are concerns as regards the functioning of the Forensic Medicine Institute. On a number
     of cases the Institute gave conflicting reports on the same case at different times. The backlog
     of the Institute leads to delays in judicial proceedings.

     As regards the professionalism and competence of the judiciary, a Council of State judgement
     of 2009 pointed out to the overlapping competences, as regards the provision of in-service
     training, of the Training Department of the Ministry of Justice and of the Turkish Justice
     Academy. Pre-service and in-service training fall both under the responsibility of the Justice
     Academy.

     The implementation of the 2009 judicial reform strategy has continued. Some of the major
     pillars of the strategy were implemented through the constitutional amendments.

     Some progress can be reported on anti-corruption (see also under political criteria – part I
     of the report).

     The Government adopted a 2010-2014 strategy for enhancing transparency and strengthening
     the fight against corruption in February 2010. A ministerial committee48 was established in
     December 2009 together with an executive board composed of representatives of public
     institutions, labour unions and of the Turkish Union of Chambers and Stock Exchanges
     (TOBB) to form further anti-corruption strategies and to direct and monitor their
     implementation. The Strategy aims at developing preventive and repressive measures against
     corruption as well as improving public governance by introducing more transparency,
     accountability and reliability into the public administration.



     48
            The ministerial committee consists of the Deputy Prime Minister and four ministers (Ministry of
            Justice, Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Labour and Social Security).



EN                                                    76                                                      EN
      An action plan, with timetables for the adoption and implementation of each measure, was
     approved by the ministerial committee in April 2010. Effective implementation could
     contribute to changing behaviour of public administration, so that it promotes and protects
     integrity and reduces opportunities for corrupt practices. However, participation by civil
     society and its role on the executive board and in implementation of the strategy need to be
     strengthened.

     By June 2010, Turkey had implemented 15 of the 21 recommendations in the 2005 evaluation
     reports by the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO). The GRECO report suggests
     further efforts, in particular to broaden the representation of the anti-corruption oversight
     body, to enhance the independence of the judiciary and, to reform the system of immunities
     and to finally establish the Ombudsman institution. The constitutional amendments provide
     the basis for progress on enhancing the independence of the judiciary and an Ombudsman
     institution.

     In December 2009, the Prime Ministerial Inspection Board was appointed as the counterpart
     of the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and was given the task of Anti-Fraud
     Coordination Structure (AFCOS) responsible for investigation of irregularities in the context
     of financial cooperation between the EU and Turkey. (See Chapter 32 – Financial control)

     In February 2010, the Constitutional Court annulled provisions of the law on the Council of
     Ethics regarding the publication of names of civil servants who violate ethics code, on the
     grounds that publicizing these names without judicial decision would jeopardize the
     presumption of innocence. Ethics training continued; approximately 7,000 civil servants
     working for central and local governments have been trained between October 2009 and
     September 2010. In September, the Government adopted a regulation on the code of ethics
     with which investigators and auditors should comply while doing their jobs. However, no
     progress has been made on extending ethics rules to academics, military personnel and the
     judiciary.

     No progress has been made on limiting the immunity of Members of Parliament concerning
     corruption-related offenses.

     Further measures are needed to complete the existing legislation and ensure its effective
     implementation to increase transparency on the financing of political parties and election
     campaigns. More resources are also required in order to better detect illegal practice, in
     particular to extend the current monitoring mechanism to election campaign funding of parties
     and candidates.

     For the first time a mayor of a metropolitan municipality was suspended from mayoral duties
     on March 2010 by the Ministry of Interior because of serious corruption allegations.
     Administrative and Judicial investigations are continuing.

     The investigation begun in 2009 into the charity association Deniz Feneri concerning a fraud
     case in Germany is continuing. The police made searches on the premises of the association
     and at the homes of the suspects. However, no indictment has been submitted to court yet.




EN                                                77                                                 EN
      The draft law on the Turkish Court of Auditors, which envisages strengthening of the Court
     and expanding its mandate, was adopted by the Plan and Budget Committee of the Parliament
     in May and is currently on the agenda of the plenary.

     Turkey needs to develop a track record of investigations, indictments and convictions.

     As regards fundamental rights, there has been some progress (see also under political
     criteria and chapter 19 Social policy and employment).

     There have been developments on the institutions monitoring and promoting human rights.
     The draft law on the establishment of the Turkish Independent Human Rights Institution was
     submitted to parliament in February 2010. Opinions from NGOs were discussed by the
     relevant parliamentary sub-committee. The draft law before parliament needs to be amended
     to bring it into line with the UN framework, in particular as regards the independence and
     functional autonomy of this new institution. It is important to conduct this process in close
     consultation with NGOs.

     As regards prohibition of torture and inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment, the
     positive trend on prevention of torture and ill-treatment continued. Some high-profile cases of
     human rights violations have resulted in convictions. However, disproportionate use of force
     by law enforcement authorities continued and is of concern.

     With regard to respect for private and family life, the constitutional amendments introduced
     the protection of personal data and the right to access to information as constitutional rights.

     In the area of freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of worship continues to
     be generally respected. The implementation of the Law on foundations continued amidst
     administrative delays (see the chapter on Property rights). The dialogue with the Alevis and
     with the non-Muslim religious communities continued but has not yet produced results.
     Members of minority religions continue to be subject to threats by extremists. A legal
     framework in line with the ECHR has yet to be established, so that all non-Muslim religious
     communities and the Alevi community can function without undue constraints, including the
     training of clergy.

     Regarding freedom of expression, including freedom and pluralism of the media, there was
     limited progress while open and free debate has continued and expanded. However, Turkish
     law does not sufficiently guarantee freedom of expression in line with the ECHR and the
     ECtHR case law. The high number of cases initiated against journalists and the frequent
     website bans are a cause for concern. Undue political pressures on the media and legal
     uncertainties affect the exercise of freedom of the press in practice.

     As regards freedom of assembly and freedom of association, including the right to form
     political parties and the right to establish trade unions, the legal framework on associations is
     broadly in line with EU standards. However, there are still cases where associations are
     subject to disproportionate controls of their activities and to judicial proceedings. There is no
     progress on amendment of the legal provisions on the closure of political parties. Launching
     of cases against LGBTT associations by administrative authorities, based on morality, limits
     the full exercise of freedom of association. The Constitutional amendments broaden trade
     union rights. However, there are restrictive provisions in the current legal framework, which
     are not in line with EU standards and ILO Conventions (see Chapter 19 – social policy and
     employment).


EN                                                  78                                                   EN
      As regards treatment of socially vulnerable and disabled persons and the principle of non-
     discrimination, an amendment to the Constitution paves the way for positive discrimination
     for disabled. Access to education, health, social and public services for persons with
     disabilities still remain critical issues, despite existence of legislation in this field. The
     Government prepared a draft proposal establishing an anti-discrimination and equality board.
     Provisions of the Turkish Criminal Code on ‘public exhibitionism’ and ‘offences against
     public morality’ are sometimes used to discriminate against LGBTT people. The Law on
     Misdemeanours is often used to impose fines against transgender persons.

     With regard to the right to education, pre-school education enrolment rate for children
     between 4 and 5 years of age increased to 39% in 2009-2010from 33% in 2008-2009. The
     primary school enrolment rates (grades 1-8) rose for both boys and girls, virtually closing the
     gender gap at national level in primary education. The Ministry of National Education has
     developed an early-warning system for children at risk of dropping out. In secondary
     education (grades 9-12), the net enrolment rate rose to 65% in 2009-2010 from 59% in 2008-
     2009.However, close to 200,000 children – especially girls in some Eastern and South-eastern
     provinces – are still out of school. As regards secondary education, there are large geographic
     variations. There is also a significant gender gap, net enrolment rates being 67.55% among
     boys and 62.21% among girls.

     On the right to property, the Law on foundations has been implemented, albeit with some
     delays and procedural problems. The Foundations Council acknowledged these problems and
     tried to speed up procedures. However, this law does not address the issues of properties
     seized and sold to third parties or of properties of foundations merged before the new
     legislation was adopted. Syriacs continue to face difficulties in relation to property. A number
     of court cases are in progress. In particular, the Mor Gabriel Syriac Orthodox monastery
     continues to face problems with land ownership. Turkey needs to ensure full respect of the
     property rights of all non-Muslim religious communities.

     With regard to gender equality and women's rights, the legal framework is broadly in place
     (see chapter 19 Social policy and employment). This framework has been strengthened
     through the constitutional amendment permitting the adoption of positive discrimination
     measures for women. However, sustained further efforts are needed to turn this legal
     framework into political, social and economic reality. Honour killings, early and forced
     marriages and domestic violence against women remain serious problems. Legislation needs
     to be implemented consistently across the country. Further training and awareness-raising on
     women’s rights and gender equality are needed.

     As regards the rights of the child, there has been progress with the legal framework on
     children’s rights, juvenile justice and the gender gap in primary education. Nevertheless,
     efforts need to be further strengthened in all areas, including education, child labour, health,
     juvenile justice, administrative capacity and coordination.

     With regard to liberty and security and the right to a fair trial, there was some improvement as
     regards access to justice in rural areas. However, access to free legal aid was limited
     especially in the South-east. Provision of legal aid did was inadequate in terms of either its
     coverage or the quality of services provided and there was no effective monitoring mechanism
     that would ensure that problems are addressed. A law of July 2010 amending the Anti-Terror
     Law and other laws provides that children accused of committing terror-related crimes will be
     tried at juvenile courts. This applies even when such offences are committed together with
     adults. In addition, children sentenced for propaganda for a terrorist organisation or for



EN                                                 79                                                   EN
      resistance to security officers for their participation in meetings or demonstrations, will no
     longer be sentenced also for membership of a terrorist organisation. In general, the law
     provides for the non-application on juveniles of a number of aggravating circumstances
     included in the Anti-Terror Law. This is expected to reduce in practice significantly the prison
     sentences imposed on children participating in meetings or demonstrations. Finally, the law
     foresees that juvenile courts can decide to postpone the announcement of a judgement, to
     convert a prison sentence to alternative sanctions, or to suspend the sentence for terror-related
     crimes.

     As regards minority rights and cultural rights, Turkey has made progress on cultural rights,
     especially by further relaxing use of the Kurdish language in private TV and radio broadcasts
     and in prisons. The 24-hour Arabic-language TV broadcasts started in 2010 in addition to the
     Kurdish-language TV channel which started the previous year. However, restrictions remain,
     particularly on use of languages other than Turkish in political life, education and contacts
     with public services. The legislation on use of languages other than Turkish is open to
     restrictive interpretations and implementation is inconsistent. There has been some progress in
     the situation of the Roma, as their issues have become more publicly debated, and
     implementation is underway. However, Roma still frequently face discriminatory treatment.
     Turkey's approach on minorities remains restrictive. Full respect for and protection of
     language, culture and fundamental rights, in accordance with European standards, have yet to
     be fully achieved. Turkey needs to make further efforts to enhance tolerance or promote
     inclusiveness vis-à-vis minorities.

     Overall, there has been progress in the area of the judiciary. The adoption of the constitutional
     amendments on the structure of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors along with the
     limitation of the competence of military courts is a positive step. Attention needs to be paid on
     the establishment of an effective dialogue with all stakeholders and the civil society at large,
     and on the implementation of these reforms in line with European standards. With respect to
     anti-corruption, progress was made as regards the development of a comprehensive anti-
     corruption strategy and an action plan as well as a body to oversee and monitor their
     implementation. However, effective implementation of the Strategy is necessary to mitigate
     corruption which remains prevalent in many areas. Turkey needs to develop a track record of
     investigation, indictments and convictions. With regard to fundamental rights, progress has
     been made. Constitutional amendments bring important changes in the area of data protection,
     trade union rights, women and children's rights. However, further significant efforts are
     needed in most areas, in particular freedom of expression and freedom of religion. Turkey's
     approach to minority rights remains restrictive.

     4.24.    Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security

     Some progress has been made with regard to migration. An amendment to Article 79 of the
     Turkish Penal Code on smuggling of migrants increasing the sentences for those involved in
     migrant smuggling, was adopted in July 2010. In March 2010, a circular was issued by the
     Ministry of the Interior on combating irregular migration. According to the circular, an
     irregular migrant for whom the legal procedures have been completed will be placed in a
     removal centre or alternative premises previously indicated by the governorate. The circular
     also lays down the ‘principles concerning the physical conditions in removal centres and the
     practices adopted in these centres’, stating that removal centres need to be regularly inspected
     by the governor, district governor and the Turkish National Police (TNP); allegations of
     human rights violations in removal centres need to be investigated; irregular migrants need to




EN                                                  80                                                   EN
      be given an opportunity to contact the UNHCR at their request; access to legal counsel is
     given provided that illegal migrants cover the costs themselves.
     Foreigners who are irregular migrants and victims of trafficking may benefit from free health
     services since the directorate general for social solidarity and assistance in the Prime
     Minister’s Office issued a circular in May 2009 to the Social Solidarity and Assistance
     Foundation. Furthermore, the task force for asylum and migration is preparing a
     comprehensive revision of the law on foreigners, in close consultation with the IOM and the
     UNHCR.
     The full implementation of the newly established circulars, and the rapid adoption of this
     legislation under preparation, is a key priority in view in particular to establish fair procedures
     for the detention and removal of irregular migrants, and to enhance their reception conditions.
     This is also very important to address the judgment issued by the European Court of Human
     Rights (ECtHR) in particular on the following two cases related to Turkey : the judgement in
     Abdolkhani and Karimnia v Turkey and Z.N.S. v Turkey, where the Court found that the
     detention and deportation of irregular migrants to their country of origin, due to the absence
     of clear provisions for ordering and extending detention, the lack of notification of the reasons
     for detention and the absence of any judicial remedy to the decision on detention were in
     breach of the European Convention on Human Rights; and to the judgment in Charahili v
     Turkey, where the Court concluded that the applicant’s conditions of detention amounted to a
     violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, prohibiting torture.
     Consultation of civil society, international organisations and academia is also crucial. Turkey
     needs also to draw on the expertise in joint cooperation projects ongoing in this field provided
     particularly by the EU. Work is also being done in view of enhancing the administrative
     capacities of Turkey to prevent irregular migration and deal with its consequences. A
     coordination board for combating illegal migration was established in February 2010 to
     identify measures to fight irregular migration, strengthen inter-institutional cooperation and
     coordination and monitor operational activity. The board is chaired by the Deputy
     Undersecretary of the Ministry of the Interior and meets every two months. Members are the
     Chief of General Staff, the Land Forces, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the TNP, the
     Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guards.
     The General Directorate for Security issued a circular in September 2010 which provides that
     each illegal migrant apprehended will be accommodated in a removal centre with the written
     permission of the Governor. The circular also introduces a standard notification that makes
     clear that all costs during the stay in a removal centre will be borne by the state. The right to
     contact a lawyer is also made clear. Additionally the notification explicitly states the right to
     appeal against the decision of deportation and the administrative custody.
     Efforts to increase the capacity to host irregular migrants in accordance with international
     standards, pending the completion of their removal procedures, continue: while, as of August
     2010, the current hosting capacity stands at 2,875; the construction/refurbishment/equipment
     through national funds of four removal centres (Bitlis, Van, Aydın and Edirne), with a
     capacity of 650 persons each, is ongoing. In addition, the establishment through EU-financed
     projects of two additional removal centres in Ankara and Erzurum, with a capacity of 750
     persons each, is under preparation.
     Awareness raising among administrators, governors, district governors, municipalities and the
     public at large on the rights of irregular migrants and procedures involved in migration
     management is a key issue to be addressed through concrete measures.



EN                                                   81                                                    EN
      Substantial progress has been made towards finalising negotiations on an EU-Turkey
     readmission agreement. Meanwhile, adequate implementation of already existing bilateral
     readmission agreements remains a priority.

     As regards the implementation of the existing readmission protocol with Greece, positive
     steps have been taken to apply its provisions more effectively. In May 2010, a joint
     declaration has been signed between the Turkish Ministry of the Interior and the Greek
     Ministry for Protection of People to achieve this aim.

     Turkey has also completed the negotiations for a readmission agreement with Pakistan.
     Readmission agreements with other countries of origin (Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus,
     Bosnia and Herzegovina, FYROM, Georgia, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, and Uzbekistan) are
     being discussed. Discussions also with Russia took place in June 2010.

     The number of irregular migrants apprehended by the law enforcement forces declined from
     65,737 in 2008 to 34,345 in 2009. In 2009 the irregular migration flow through the Greek and
     Bulgarian land borders dropped by 40% compared to the year 2008. The number of irregular
     border crossings at sea border between Greece and Turkey saw a decrease of 16%. In the first
     seven months of 2010, 15,397 irregular migrants were reported to have been apprehended.
     1,027 smugglers were apprehended in 2009, 970 of whom are Turkish.
     In the area of asylum, some progress can be reported. With 7.834 new asylum seekers in 2009
     the number reportedly decreased in comparison with 2008 (11.248). Out of 7.834 applicants,
     3.763 are Iraquis (48 %), 1.981 are Iranians (25 %), 1009 are Afghans (13 %) and 295 are
     Somalis (4 %). An amendment to the regulation implementing the Law on work permits for
     foreigners adopted on January 2010 softened the conditions under which asylum seekers can
     apply for work permits. A person to whom asylum seeker status has been granted by the
     Ministry of the Interior can apply for work permits irrespective of the validity period for
     which the residence permit has been delivered.
     In March 2010, a circular has been issued by the Ministry of the Interior on the residence
     permit fees (‘Ikamet’) imposed on asylum seekers which, without providing explicitly for the
     removal of such fees, sets out a procedure that may, de facto, bring about a similar effect. The
     circular also has a retroactive effect with regard to outstanding fees and additional fines due
     by asylum seekers prior to its entry into force. The efficient and uniform implementation of
     this circular is crucial to the resettlement prospects of asylum seekers who, despite the
     availability of a third country to host them, are not currently allowed to leave Turkey pending
     the satisfaction of unpaid fees and fines.
     A new circular has been adopted in March 2010 for asylum seekers who are hosted in the
     institutions run by the directorate general for social services and the child protection agency.
     The circular encompasses data protection, social and general health insurance as well as
     access to premises by UNHCR staff. The asylum seekers subject to these provisions include
     unaccompanied minors, the physically disabled and the elderly.
     In addition, the task force on asylum and migration is preparing a law on asylum and a law on
     the establishment of an asylum unit, in close consultation with the UNHCR.
     Progress continues to be limited by the fact that Turkey maintains the geographical limitations
     on the 1951 Convention relating to the status of refugees and the related 1967 Protocol.
     Overall, the landmark reforms to provide Turkey with a modern, efficient and fair
     management system in line with core international and European standards are still at an early


EN                                                 82                                                   EN
      stage. The finalization of a roadmap on asylum and migration is key. The Turkish institutions
     have only limited capacity and, most importantly, no ownership of the refugee status
     determination process for non-European asylum seekers. Thus the UNHCR, despite not
     having formal status in Turkey, is virtually the sole authority capable of carrying out and
     managing asylum procedures.
     It remains a key priority to ensure equal and fair access to asylum procedures, to shorten,
     albeit with the limited existing capacity, the waiting time as well as to give would-be asylum
     seekers full access to legal aid and UNHCR staff.
     Progress in the work towards the establishment of a country of origin and asylum case
     management systems, and to facilitate the possibility for civil society organisations to
     cooperate with the administration in providing assistance to refugees and migrants is also key.
     A number of civil society organisations working in the area of asylum and migration came
     together on 15 March 2010 and founded the ‘Turkey Refugee Rights Coordination’.
     There has been little progress on visa policy. In August 2010, Turkey revised its policy as
     regards duration of stays allowed for 90 days within 180 days, in line with EU acquis.
     However, Turkey does not apply a uniform policy towards all EU citizens as regards the visa
     obligation. Currently, citizens of 12 EU Member States are required to hold a visa to enter
     Turkey, which can be obtained at the Turkish borders. Citizens of the other 15 Member States
     are exempted from the visa obligation for a short stay of up to 90 days.
     Turkish passports with biometric security features were put into use on 1 June 2010. Visa
     issuing is now processed on-line among the Consular Offices and the Ministry of the Interior.
     Introduction of new Turkish visa stickers with higher security features was further delayed.
     Airport transit visas remain to be introduced. No administrative initiative took place for
     gradually abolishing the issuance of sticker- and stamp-type visas at borders. Turkey agreed
     on visa exemptions with, Libya and Jordan in December 2009, Lebanon in January 2010,
     Russia in May 2010 and Tanzania and. Similar agreements with Syria in October 2009, Serbia
     in July 2010 and Cameroon, published in July 2010, exclude ordinary passport holders. Some
     of these countries are on the EU’s negative list.
     Overall, alignment with the acquis in this area is at a very early stage.
     On external borders and Schengen, limited progress has been achieved. The task force for
     external borders meets every two months and prepares a draft roadmap for harmonising the
     border management system with EU standards as part of the efforts to implement the national
     action plan on integrated border management (IBM). A coordination board for IBM has been
     established in May 2010 by Prime Ministerial decree to create an official follow-up
     mechanism at decision-making level to screen progress towards achieving the target of IBM.
     The board is also tasked with developing further policies and strategies in the area. In-service
     training on IBM was delivered to all sub-governors, despite the delays in adopting the
     proposed legislative amendment currently pending in the Parliament on expanding the tasks
     of the deputy governors acting as administrative heads of the border agencies.
     Inter-agency cooperation remains a key issue to be developed pending the reform process. For
     instance, efficient and coordinated use of databases and risk analysis at the borders are
     missing elements for integrated border management. Measures are required to deploy more
     trained staff and additional border check equipment at border crossing points to prepare for
     professionalised border management. Further efforts are needed to transfer border control
     tasks to a new border security agency; the current agencies need to be strengthened at the



EN                                                   83                                                 EN
      same time as this new agency is established. The setting-up of the specialised department for
     passports within TNP in May 2010 is a step forward in that direction.
     Negotiations on a working agreement with Frontex has continued and few outstanding issues
     need to be solved to conclude it. Contact points have been established and joint operations
     with Member States conducted.
     Overall, further efforts are needed as regards alignment with the acquis in this area.
     No progress can be reported on judicial cooperation in criminal and civil matters. On the
     latter, Turkey has not yet ratified the 2007 Hague Convention on the international recovery of
     child support and other forms of family maintenance nor the 1996 Hague Convention on
     jurisdiction, applicable law, recognition, enforcement and cooperation in respect of parental
     responsibility and measures for the protection of children. On legal aid, a draft law on
     compensation of crime victims is under preparation. During the reporting period, 2,270
     requests falling within the ambit of judicial cooperation in civil matters were received by
     Turkey and 1,809 requests from Turkey.
     As regards judicial cooperation in criminal matters, Turkey has not yet signed the Council of
     Europe Convention on cybercrime. Turkey participated in the regular meetings of the
     European Judicial Network (EJN). A website for Eurojust and EJN has been created by the
     Ministry of Justice on which all requests forwarded to contact points are now being published.
     No steps have been taken to sign a cooperation agreement with Eurojust. Effective personal
     data protection regime is crucial for efficient international judicial cooperation.
     During the reporting period a total of 159 extraditions were requested by Turkey,. 20
     extraditions were requested by the EU Member States, of which 3 were accepted. Regarding
     mutual legal assistance on criminal matters, 1,986 requests were received by Turkey and
     2,190 requests from Turkey.
     Overall, alignment with the acquis in this area is at an early stage.
     In the area of police cooperation Turkey is a party to the main international conventions. It
     signed a number of bilateral agreements on police cooperation (Iraq – October 2009, Ukraine
     – December 2009, and Syria – December 2009). The delay in adopting a personal data
     protection law is limiting police cooperation at international level and conclusion of an
     operational cooperation agreement with Europol is still proving difficult. Training has started
     to be delivered to the Turkish National Police staff under the ethical leadership programme.
     This programme is a training package prepared by the council of ethics for public service on
     ethical principles and ethical conduct. Implementation of community policing aiming at
     strengthening public relations of the Police is being widened and institutionalised in all
     provinces.
     Overall, further efforts are needed as regards alignment with the acquis in this area.
     Limited progress has been registered in the fight against organised crime. A national
     strategy (2010 – 2015) and action plan (2010 – 2012) against organised crime were signed by
     the Prime Minister in July 2010. The Turkish National Police has established witness
     protection units in 60 provinces. Establishment of a national fingerprint and DNA database is
     needed. Reliable and comparable data need to be collected in relation to law enforcement.
     Inter-agency cooperation remains to be strengthened.




EN                                                   84                                                EN
      During the reporting period no significant progress has been noted in the area of combating
     trafficking in human beings. 87 traffickers were arrested and the number of victims of
     trafficking identified and assisted amounted to 37. The general directorate for social
     assistance and solidarity in the Prime Minister’s Office has signed an agreement with the
     Foundation for Women’s Solidarity and the Human Resource Development Foundation, the
     two NGOs that are currently running respectively the shelters for victims of trafficking in
     Ankara and Istanbul, allowing the shelters to receive financial support amounting to
     approximately €120,000 for each.
     Institutionally, the support mechanism envisaged to assist the national task force on the fight
     against human trafficking in its coordination tasks has not been established as yet.
     Identification of victims of human trafficking and provision of necessary support and
     coordination between the different institutions is undertaken within the framework of National
     Referral Mechanism (NRM) which includes all actively involved stakeholders. Adequate
     management and organisational arrangements are in particular needed for one of the NRM’s
     main features, the 157 helpline. Further work to bring the national legislation into line with
     the Council of Europe’s Convention on action against trafficking in human beings is
     important and so is setting a clear timetable for its ratification.
     Overall, further efforts are needed as regards alignment with the acquis in this area.

     For the fight against money laundering see Chapter 4

     With regard to progress concerning the fight against terrorism, an Undersecretariat for
     public order and security has been established in March 2010 in the Ministry of the Interior to
     develop policies and strategies on counter-terrorism and to ensure coordination among the
     relevant institutions. A law is in preparation concerning the fight against financing of
     terrorism to meet the requirements of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
     recommendations on imposing sanctions on persons involved in financing terrorism. Turkey
     has taken decisions to freeze the assets of some of the persons included in the list adopted by
     the UN Security Council. The Financial Crimes Investigation Unit (MASAK) received 49
     suspicious transaction reports regarding financing of terrorism in 2009 compared to 228 in
     2008. MASAK signed memoranda of understanding to exchange information with regard to
     the fight against financing of terrorism and money laundering with its counterparts in Croatia,
     Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, Japan and Norway. Turkey faced increased terrorist attacks
     from the PKK in 2010, which have prompted preparations for involving professional security
     forces in the fight against terrorism.

     Turkey has not yet ratified the International Convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear
     terrorism, the Council of Europe Convention on the prevention of terrorism, and the Council
     of Europe Convention on laundering, search, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds from
     crime and on the financing of terrorism.
     Overall, further efforts are needed as regards alignment with the acquis in this area.
     Some progress has been made in the area of the fight against drugs. Following the adoption
     of a national strategy against drugs and drug addiction (2006-2012), local action plans have
     been adopted in 63 provinces. An action plan specific to the fight against drug trafficking in
     rural areas was adopted in April 2010. This action plan needs to be coordinated with the
     implementation of the national action plan against drugs and drug addiction (2010-2012),
     which has not been adopted yet by the Ministry of the Interior although the previous plan
     (2007-2009) has come to an end.



EN                                                  85                                                 EN
      Successful operations resulting in seizures of 51,451 kg of cannabis and 16,391 kg of heroin
     were carried out by Turkish law enforcement bodies. In all, 11 controlled delivery operations
     have been made. 453,5 kg heroin, 623 gr cocaine and 2 kg opium were seized as a result of
     those operations. Turkey remains one of the main trafficking routes for drugs to the EU. As
     regards treatment of drug addicts, a new treatment centre has been opened in Gaziantep in
     February 2010. Bupronorfin and Naloksan have started to be used as substitute treatment in
     line with the implementing regulation for treatment centres. A new regulation on the
     protection of human health from the damages caused by solvents/inhalants has been issued on
     August 2010 by the Ministry of Health. The regulation covers production, import, trade,
     supervision, storage and usage areas of these substances.

     The agreement concerning Turkey’s participation in the European Monitoring Centre for
     Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) has still not been ratified. Turkey continues to attend
     Reitox meetings of heads of focal points as an observer. As regards the status of the national
     Reitox focal point (TUBIM), a draft legislation on the establishment of a national drugs
     observatory has been prepared and needs to be adopted. TUBIM human resources capacity
     increased from 9 to 17 but it has no autonomous budget in particular for full data collection.
     The capacity of TUBIM should be further strengthened and stabilised. A more balanced
     approach towards drugs supply and demand reduction needs to be followed also through
     strengthening treatment and rehabilitation facilities.

     Overall, further efforts are needed as regards alignment with the acquis in this area.
     Some progress can be reported in the area of customs cooperation, with regard to
     enforcement capacity. The Undersecretariat for customs strengthened its vehicle tracking
     system and mobile inspection units. One scanner was installed in Hamzabeyli border crossing
     points that further enhance their enforcement capacity. Coordination between the customs
     enforcement and other law enforcement agencies at the border needs to be strengthened. Risk-
     based controls need to be improved. Turkey continued to be one of the main suppliers of
     counterfeit goods seized at EU customs and lacks enforcement capacity for IPR controls on
     both imports and exports.
     Overall, further efforts are needed as regards alignment with the acquis in this area.
     For counterfeiting of the euro see Chapter 32.
     Conclusion
     Progress, albeit uneven, has been achieved in the area of justice, freedom and security.
     Substantial progress was made towards finalising negotiations on an EU-Turkey readmission
     agreement. Institutional arrangements on migration and asylum need to set clear
     responsibilities for all institutions concerned and endow them with the necessary resources
     and skills to handle the assigned tasks efficiently. Some progress can be reported in the area
     of drugs and customs cooperation. Limited progress can be reported in the area of external
     borders and Schengen, organised crime and terrorism. Little progress has taken place in the
     area of visa policy. There has been no progress on judicial cooperation in criminal and civil
     matters. Overall, legislation currently being drafted needs to be adopted, and signed
     international agreements need to be ratified, as a matter of urgency.




EN                                                  86                                                EN
      4.25.    Chapter 25: Science and research

     Good progress can be reported in the area of science and research policy. A number of
     regulatory arrangements were made to encourage international researchers to stay longer or
     settle permanently in Turkey. A new support programme was launched to encourage the
     return to Turkey of Turkish researchers who have completed their doctoral studies but
     currently live abroad.

     At its December 2009 meeting, the Turkish Supreme Council for Science and Technology
     (SCST) decided to begin preparing a national science, technology and innovation action plan
     for the period 2011-2016. At the June meeting, the SCST decided to establish, under the
     coordination of TUBİTAK, Work Groups consisting of experts from the public and private
     sector as well as from universities to prepare national research and innovation strategies in the
     fields of energy, water and food.

     R&D expenditure under the national support programmes grantedby the Turkish Scientific
     and Technological Research Council (Tübitak) was increased to €310 million (€210 million
     for industrial R&D) in 2009, from €205 million (€150 million for industrial R&D) in 2008,
     representing a 50% increase overall. A total of 62 new private-sector R&D centres have been
     approved by the Turkish Ministry of Trade and Industry. This was the first result of the R&D
     Law, adopted in March 2008, which aims to encourage research and technological
     development activities by providing a number of incentives and support mechanisms for
     investors and SMEs (tax incentives and elimination of some bureaucratic obstacles to R&D).

     The expenditure on research increased to €5.63 billion, from €5.47 billion in 2007, reaching
     0.73% of GDP. This is well below the national target of attaining 2% by 2013. In July 2010,
     the Board of the European Investment Bank (EIB) approved an investment loan of €300
     million aiming, in co-financing with the Turkish Undersecretariat of Treasury, to strengthen
     the research infrastructure capacity for a sustainable future.

     The administrative capacity of Tübitak has been reinforced through recruitment of new staff.
     This brought about a 15% personnel increase at Tübitak.

     The level of Turkish participation in the 7th Framework Programme for Research and
     Technological Development (FP7) further improved but efforts remain necessary to increase
     the research capacity and scientific excellence. The discussions with the Commission on the
     update the action plan covering the period 2010-2011 are ongoing aiming at supporting
     Turkey's take up of FP7 projects are ongoing.

     Active cooperation with the Joint Research Centre (JRC) continued through the participation
     of Turkish researchers in JRC workshops, high-level meetings and JRC projects and
     networks, and the secondment of Turkish researchers to JRC institutions.

     Turkey launched, in June 2010, an online consultation process targeting the Turkish research
     community to determine their national positions for FP8. The outcome will then be submitted
     to the Commission to contribute to FP8 preparations.

     Negotiations and preparations for the association to the Seventh Euratom Framework
     programme through the conclusion of a S&T Agreement are ongoing.

     Concerning its integration into the European Research Area (ERA), Turkey is participating
     in seven Joint Programming Initiatives, which aim to address major European societal


EN                                                  87                                                   EN
      challenges by harmonising national research activities. Turkey participates, as an associated
     country, in the Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan), and is committed to strengthen
     its research efforts accordingly. Turkey further increased the number of scientists and
     improved the mobility of researchers. Turkey actively participates in all advisory bodies on
     the European Research Area including the ERAC (European Research Area Committee) as
     observer.

     Turkey actively participates in all advisory bodies on the European Research Area including
     the ERAC (European Research Area Committee) as observer.

     Conclusion

     Turkey is well prepared in the area of science and research and good progress has been
     achieved towards future integration into the European Research Area. Overall, Turkey’s
     participation and success rate in Framework Programmes are on the rise. However, further
     efforts are required to maintain these rates all through the 7th Framework Programme for
     Research and Technological Development (FP7).

     4.26.    Chapter 26: Education and culture

     There has been some progress in the area of education, training and youth.

     The Ministry of National Education adopted its strategic plan 2010–2014 including targets
     and performance indicators for the implementation of Turkey’s reform agenda in line with
     key EU standards, including the European Qualification Framework.

     A Green Paper for the restructuring of the services of the Ministry, notably in vocational
     education and training, was finalised.

     Turkey improved its performance in all the areas in which EU-level benchmarks have been
     set for 2010 and 2020, but remains in general well below the EU average, in particular for the
     rate of early school leavers and participation of adults in lifelong learning. The enrolment
     rates continued to increase at all educational levels. In particular, following the introduction of
     compulsory pre-school education in 32 pilot provinces, the enrolment rate for pre-school
     education rose to 39%. The same measure was extended to 57 provinces in the school year
     2010-11 and is to cover all provinces in the school year 2012-2013. In the area of higher
     education, with the establishment of 7 new state and 1 private universities in 2009 and 2010
     the total number of universities in Turkey has reached 154. The share of 30-34 years having
     successfully completed tertiary education increased to 14.7 % in 2009.

     Turkey is at an advanced stage of implementing the Bologna process recommendations.
     However, there are a number of challenges ahead. These are recognition of qualifications,
     quality assurance and establishment of a national qualifications framework based on the
     European Qualifications Framework (EQF).

     The Lifelong Learning and Youth in Action programmes continue to attract grant applications
     far exceeding the available budget. In 2009, more than 1200 project applications and some
     10,000 individual mobilities were funded. In 2010, Turkey’s financial contribution to the
     programmes reached almost €80 million and was paid in time.

     In the area of culture, Turkish operators continued to participate in the Culture programme,
     although as project co-organisers and not as lead applicants. In addition, Turkey also took part



EN                                                   88                                                    EN
      in the European Cultural Heritage Days. In April 2010, departments of, respectively, Kurdish,
     Arab and Assyrian language and culture were established at Mardin University.
     Despite the resignations of key players from the organisational structure, the activities for
     Istanbul 2010 European Capital of Culture were launched in January. The agency responsible
     for the events, Istanbul 2010, selected nearly 600 projects, two thirds of which are related to
     urban rehabilitation/restoration while the remainder involve arts events. The agenda covers all
     aspects of traditional as well as contemporary arts. Youth, children, artists and the public at
     large have all been targeted.
     Turkey has not yet ratified the UNESCO Convention on the protection and promotion of the
     diversity of cultural expressions.
     Conclusion
     There has been some progress in this chapter, in particular in the area of education. The
     overall school enrolment continued to increase and Turkey continued to improve its
     performance against the EU common benchmarks. There has been some progress in the area
     of culture but no progress on legislative alignment.

     4.27.   Chapter 27: Environment

     Limited progress can be reported on horizontal legislation. The scope of the by-law on
     environmental impact assessment (EIA) has been extended and the EIA Directive is now
     transposed to a large degree. However, procedures for public and transboundary consultations
     have not been fully aligned and implemented. There are increasing national and international
     public concerns over the planned Turkish-Russian nuclear power plant project to be built on
     the eastern Mediterranean coast of Turkey, where seismic activity may create high risks and
     for which so far no EIA or strategic environmental assessment (SEA) has been carried out.
     Turkey started discussions with Bulgaria with the view to concluding an agreement that
     would address the transboundary aspects of the environmental impact assessment for the EU-
     backed Nabucco pipeline project to be built across the frontier of the two countries.
     Transposition of the SEA Directive is at an early stage.

     Some progress has been achieved on air quality. The legislation relating to the sulphur
     content of certain liquid fuels has been fully aligned with the acquis. A by-law on waste
     incineration was adopted. Turkey became a party to the Stockholm Convention on persistent
     organic pollutants. The administrative capacity for implementing the Directive on ambient air
     quality is not sufficient.

     Good progress can be reported in the field of waste management. Turkey adopted its national
     waste management plan for 2009–2013. Legislation on the control of hazardous waste, on
     receipt of waste from ships and on control of waste has been amended in line with the acquis.
     New legislation on end-of-life vehicles has been adopted. Legislation on the sanitary
     landfilling of waste was adopted, including provisions from the Waste Framework Directive
     on reducing the percentage of biodegradables. A by-law on the reclamation of land degraded
     by mining activities has also been adopted. Some EU companies complained about barriers to
     trade created by implementation of the by-law restricting the use of certain hazardous
     substances in electrical and electronic equipment.

     There has been little progress in the area of water quality. Legislation on the control of water
     pollution was amended so as to regulate permit procedures. A high-level steering committee



EN                                                 89                                                   EN
      for water quality management was set up in order to increase coordination among the
     institutions involved and with the aim to develop strategies and policies for further alignment
     with the acquis. The institutional framework for water management is fragmented and not
     organised at river basin level. A number of basin protection action plans have been drafted,
     which will eventually be converted into river basin management plans. Transboundary
     consultations on water issues are still at a very early stage. Turkey signed with Greece a joint
     declaration providing for increased cooperation on the management of the Meric/Evros river
     basin.

     No progress can be reported on nature protection. The draft law on nature protection and
     biodiversity, submitted to the Turkish parliament, raises concerns, in particular as regards the
     abolition of the current protection status of many sites that would be a useful contribution to
     the Turkish Natura 2000 network. The national biodiversity strategy and action plan, and
     implementing legislation on birds and habitats remain to be adopted. There is growing
     concern about the negative effects on potentially protected species of flora and fauna of
     building new water and energy infrastructure in the eastern part of the country. The list of
     potential Natura 2000 sites has not yet been compiled. An amendment to the by-law on the
     protection of wetlands has weakened the protection status of wetlands, which are protected
     under the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance. Responsibility for nature
     protection is not clearly allocated between the various competent institutions.

     Limited progress can be reported regarding industrial pollution control and risk
     management. The legislation on the control of industrial air pollution was amended in order
     to regulate the permit procedures. By-laws on large combustion plants and on the control of
     major-accident hazards were adopted. Introduction of an integrated permit system is at an
     early stage.

     There has been some progress in the field of chemicals. Legislation on biocidal products was
     adopted. The capacity is insufficient for effective implementation.

     Very limited progress was made regarding climate change. Some progress was made on trade
     in ozone-depleting substances. Turkey began implementing legislation transposing the acquis
     on the availability of consumer information on fuel economy and CO2 emissions in
     connection with the marketing of new passenger cars. A national climate change strategy
     was adopted by the Ministry of Environment and Forestry with UNDP/GEF support.
     Moreover, a climate change department was established within the Ministry of Environment
     and Forestry and a high level coordination committee for climate change was set up in order
     to increase coordination among government institutions. However, no preparations for the EU
     Emissions Trading Scheme have started yet. Turkey submitted its greenhouse gas inventory
     but has not submitted its fifth national communication so far. In the international climate
     negotiations on the post 2012 agreement, Turkey has had a tendency not to align with the EU
     positions lately. It has not associated itself with the Copenhagen Accord either. Turkey’s aim
     to limit greenhouse gas emission growth by 11% from the projected 2020 emissions on the
     basis of the business as usual scenario cannot be considered to be ambitious.

     Legislative alignment in the field of noise is well advanced. However, preparation of noise
     maps and action plans is still at an early stage.

     Some progress has been made in the area of administrative capacity. The Law on
     environmental permissions and licences was adopted to enhance the environmental
     inspectorates. Mechanisms to coordinate the work between administrative bodies at different



EN                                                 90                                                   EN
      levels were put in place. No progress has been made towards establishing a national
     environment agency. Administrative capacity needs further strengthening, including
     coordination between the relevant authorities at all levels. Environmental protection
     requirements are still not taken into account in the framing of policies and in the
     implementation of infrastructure projects.

     Conclusion

     Overall, progress was made towards further alignment. Preparations in the field of
     environment are at an early stage. Turkey has made good progress on waste management
     whereas limited progress can be reported on horizontal legislation, air and water quality,
     industrial pollution, chemicals and administrative capacity. Turkey has made very limited
     progress as regards climate change and no progress in the area of nature protection. Turkey
     made progress on administrative capacity by putting in place mechanisms to coordinate the
     administrative bodies at different levels in this field. Investments in the field of the
     environment need to be increased.

     4.28.    Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection

     There has been little progress in the area of consumer protection. The consumer movement
     is still weak and does not receive government support. Better dialogue as well as active
     participation by NGOs in policy- and law-making mechanisms needs to be ensured, but
     government activity is low in this respect.

     Some progress can be reported in the field of product safety-related issues. The
     Undersecretariat for foreign trade issued legislation streamlining surveillance reports and
     notifications. A national market surveillance strategy for 2010-2012 was adopted. Market
     surveillance activities have continued to increase and the Undersecretariat’s report on market
     surveillance activities performed in 2009 is a notable step towards the systematic collection of
     comparable data. The use of risk assessment methods, which would help optimise the use of
     limited market surveillance budgets, remains insufficient, as is evaluation of the effectiveness
     of actions. Market surveillance needs to be further improved through enhanced visibility,
     involvement of consumer organisations and awareness among the general public of the
     concept of risky products, as well as better coordination within and between surveillance
     agencies, including the use of IT tools. The revision of the general product safety legislation is
     pending, which is a key element for the accession negotiations in this chapter. [See Chapter 1]

     There has been little progress in the area of non-safety related issues. Adoption of the
     consumer protection law is pending too, which is a key element for the accession negotiations
     in this chapter. The consumer portal providing e-application services to consumers for their
     complaints has been made operational. Consumers can now file their complaints
     electronically and the complaint is directed to the consumer arbitration committee. This is a
     positive step to speed up the arbitration process and ease access to information for the
     consumer courts. Follow-up of the decisions of the advisory Consumer Council, and
     consistent legal interpretation of the consumer laws by the courts and arbitration committees
     need to be ensured. Specialisation of the arbitration committees needs to be improved.

     Some progress can be reported in the field of public health.

     Regarding horizontal aspects, the Ministry of Health published its first strategic plan,
     covering the years 2010-2014. The plan aims to improve and enhance the well-being of
     society by combating threats to health, improving the safety and quality of health services,


EN                                                  91                                                    EN
      and responding to health needs on the basis of equity and accessibility through a human-
     centred service approach. The introduction of a family medicine system aims to better
     respond to health needs and monitoring the population's health status, which currently is
     constrained by the limited number of family physician specialists and the absence of a well
     designed reporting system.

     As regards tobacco, Turkey largely fulfils the acquis requirements. Only final verifications of
     provisions on export of tobacco products and implementing measures remain outstanding.
     The Turkish authorities have identified 14 pictorial warnings which must be used for all
     tobacco products produced. Efforts have been made to raise the awareness in the fight against
     smoking. As a result of relatively successful implementation of the smoking ban in all public
     places since 2009, Turkey observed the lowest cigarette consumption level in five years
     during the first quarter of 2010. However, the smoking ban was challenged with reference to
     personal freedoms and business interests, and a Constitutional Court procedure was launched.

     In the field of communicable diseases little progress was made. Acquis alignment is
     moderately advanced, and harmonisation regarding notifiable diseases and case definitions to
     ensure compatibility and comparability of data at EU level continued. However law
     enforcement is insufficient, and no progress was reported on strengthening the administrative
     structures for systematic monitoring, follow-up and implementation of control and
     surveillance measures, or on the establishment of the national institute of public health. The
     trial to establish an early warning and response system for intestinal diseases was expanded to
     another 10 provinces.

     There has been some progress in the area of blood and blood components. Legislative
     harmonisation is well advanced. Further alignment efforts concerning definitions and
     standards are ongoing. It still remains to be verified whether the enforcement capacity to carry
     out monitoring, surveillance and inspection tasks is sufficient and competent authorities are
     fully defined. Preparations in this area are ongoing.

     There has been some progress in the area of tissues and cells. An implementing regulation
     was adopted but it remains to be verified whether this legislation fully responds to EU acquis.
     The national cell coordination centre (Türkök) has not become operational yet and
     administrative capacity for surveillance activities in this area needs to be reinforced.
     Preparations for alignment with the EU acquis for all types of tissues and cells
     (musculoskeletal, cardio-vascular, cornea, ART, etc.) are still ongoing.

     No progress can be reported in the field of mental health. The mental health action plan is
     finalised but has yet to be adopted. Overall, preparations in this area are at an early stage.

     Little progress can be reported in the field of cancer. The physical infrastructure to conduct
     community-based screening programmes is in place. The screening of target groups for breast
     and cervical cancers has reached 12% and 18% respectively (target 70% by 2015). Drafting of
     the regulation on electromagnetic fields is in progress. The national cancer institute has yet to
     be established. Preparations in this area are on track.

     Conclusion

     Some progress can be reported on consumer and health protection. In the area of consumer
     protection, more efforts are still necessary, in particular on non-safety related issues, to
     strengthen the consumer movement and to ensure proper enforcement of consumer protection
     in general. Coordination and cooperation between stakeholders remain weak. In the area of


EN                                                  92                                                   EN
      public health, there has been good progress in terms of legislative alignment. However,
     enforcement remains insufficient in areas other than tobacco. The administrative structures
     and enforcement powers necessary to implement the transposed legislation and monitor
     progress require strengthening. Preparations in the area of consumer and health protection are
     on track.

     4.29.   Chapter 29: Customs Union

     There has been some progress with regard to customs legislation.

     Turkey adopted the provisions implementing its new customs law, further aligning its customs
     rules with the EU acquis. The Undersecretariat for customs adopted implementing legislation
     on binding tariff information that limits the rights of economic operators to apply for binding
     tariff information, particularly those importing products that are subject to mandatory
     laboratory testing. The Undersecretariat amended the implementing provisions on laboratory
     controls for processed agricultural products to limit mandatory laboratory controls exclusively
     to cases where the products are imported in bulk or their tariff classification cannot be
     determined by customs. The overall level of alignment with the EU acquis in the field of
     customs rules is high thanks also to the existence of the EU-Turkey Customs Union.
     However, further alignment is required with regard to customs rules on intellectual property
     rights and on the exemptions granted to goods used or consumed in the free zones regulated
     by the Undersecretariat for foreign trade. The Turkish duty relief legislation allowing duty-
     free shops at entry points is not in line with Turkey’s Customs Union obligations.

     There has been no alignment regarding the rules on surveillance of imports and exports of
     goodsand tariff quotas. In particular, the legislation for tariff quotas provided for processed
     agricultural products is not in place and the management of the few existing tariff quotas is
     not in line with EU standards. Products originating outside the EU but in free circulation in
     the EU market are still subject to product safety inspections in Turkey, even if the goods have
     already been cleared by customs in the EU, bear the CE mark and are accompanied by an
     ATR movement certificate. In the context of these inspections, economic operators are
     systematically obliged to submit a declaration of origin before customs clearance. Requiring
     operators to declare the origin of products before their customs clearance is an infringement
     of the Customs Union.

     As regards administrative and operational capacity, some progress can be reported. The
     Undersecretariat strengthened its vehicle tracking system and mobile inspection units.
     Through public-private partnership contracts signed with Turkish private sector organisations,
     the Undersecretariat was supplied with scanners that further enhanced its enforcement
     capacity at some border crossing points. The Undersecretariat has to improve its risk-based
     analysis with a view to applying it soundly and uniformly throughout all customs offices. The
     feedback reporting mechanisms between the Undersecretariat’s central risk analysis units and
     regional customs teams should be reinforced. Coordination between customs enforcement and
     other law enforcement agencies at the border needs to be improved. Simplified procedures
     need to be applied in order to facilitate legitimate trade by reducing physical inspections.
     Turkey continued to be one of the main suppliers of counterfeit goods seized at EU customs
     and lacks enforcement capacity for IPR controls on both imports and exports.

     Further efforts were made towards achieving IT interconnectivity with the EU systems on
     transit (NCTS) and tariffs (TARIC, Quota, and Surveillance). Turkey reached a high level of
     alignment in the field of transit with a view to starting the process for acceding to the



EN                                                 93                                                  EN
      Common Transit Convention (CTC). Turkey needs to step up its efforts to introduce paperless
     customs procedures incorporating one-stop controls. No progress can be reported regarding
     the adoption of an IT strategy by the Undersecretariat. The Undersecretariat published an
     information notice on setting the rules determining the preferential origin of products in the
     framework of the Pan-Euro Med system of cumulation.

     ‘Customs Union’ is one of eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted by
     the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by
     the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on the
     free movement of goods carried by vessels and airplanes registered in Cyprus or whose last
     port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to implement fully the acquis
     relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     The Customs Union has enabled Turkey to reach a high level of alignment in this field in
     terms of both legislation and administrative capacity. However, the duty-free status of shops
     located at entry points is not in line with the acquis. Legislation on free zones, surveillance
     and tariff quotas which are regulated by the Undersecretariat for foreign trade still needs to be
     aligned. Requiring importers of products which are in free circulation in the EU market to
     submit information on origin prior to customs clearance is not in line with the Customs
     Union. Further efforts are required to improve risk-based controls and simplified procedures
     in order to facilitate legitimate trade and reduce physical controls. The Undersecretariat for
     customs must deliver on its commitment to effectively enforce intellectual property rights and
     combat counterfeit goods.

     4.30.    Chapter 30: External relations

     Some progress can be reported in the field of the common commercial policy.

     Turkey’s level of alignment with the EU’s common commercial policy remains high. Good
     progress was recorded in the alignment of the Turkish general system of preferences (GSP).
     Iraq was included in the list of countries to which Turkey applies its GSP. Turkey adopted the
     GSP scheme, including for processed agricultural products in terms of their industrial
     component. Further alignment with the EU’s GSP, in particular with regard to its geographic
     coverage, is needed.

     Turkey decided to extend for three years the safeguard measures imposed in four cases
     (footwear, motorcycles, steam irons, and vacuum cleaners), which have been in place since
     2006. Turkey has made increasing use of safeguard measures over the last four years.

     There has been progress on bilateral agreements with third countries. During the reporting
     period, Turkey signed a free trade agreement with Jordan.

     Turkey’s level of coordination with the EU within the World Trade Organisation, in particular
     as regards the Doha Development Agenda, has been satisfactory but there is still room for
     improvement in this area, notably in the field of agriculture and trade facilitation. Within the
     OECD, the coordination has been satisfactory.

     No progress can be reported on medium- and long-term export credits, as well as on dual use
     goods. Concerning dual-use export controls, Turkey has not aligned itself with the EU
     position on membership of certain suppliers’ groups, such as the Wassenaar Arrangement on


EN                                                  94                                                   EN
      export controls for conventional arms and dual-use goods and technologies, and the Missile
     Technology Control Regime.

     Turkey made some progress in the field of development policy and humanitarian aid. The
     total amount of official development aid granted by Turkey reached some €707 million in
     2009. The level of alignment remained satisfactory in this field.

     ‘External relations’ is one of eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted by
     the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by
     the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on the
     free movement of goods carried by vessels and airplanes registered in Cyprus or whose last
     port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to implement fully the acquis
     relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     Although Turkey has achieved a high level of alignment in this area, owing to the Customs
     Union, alignment has not yet been completed and further work remains to be done in many
     areas, in particular on the general system of preferences with regard to its geographical
     coverage.

     4.31.   Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy

     The regular political dialogue between the EU and Turkey continued to cover international
     issues of common interest, including Iraq, Iran, the South Caucasus, Pakistan, Afghanistan,
     the Middle East peace process and the Balkans. (Concerning neighbourly relations with other
     enlargement countries and Member States, see Section 2.3 — Political criteria)

     As regards the common foreign and security policy (CFSP), in the reporting period, Turkey
     aligned itself, when invited, with 54 out of 73 the relevant EU declarations and Council
     decisions (74 % alignment).

     Bilateral relations with Iraq continued to develop positively. Turkey maintained close
     contacts with Iraqi authorities. Several high-level visits took place, including those by vice-
     President Adil Abdul Mahdi and Kurdish regional government President Massoud Barzani.
     Turkey held extensive consultations with Iraqi political factions in the aftermath of the March
     general election.

     As for relations with Iran, Turkey sees Iran as an important partner in the region and has
     sought to further develop its relations with that country. Turkey has confirmed its opposition
     to Iran’s military nuclear programme. Turkey, together with Brazil, negotiated an agreement
     with Iran concerning a fuel swap deal for the Tehran Research Reactor (TRR). Turkey did not
     support the EU, US and other countries in the UN Security Council for additional sanctions
     against Iran.

     As regards relations with the South Caucasus and Central Asia, Ankara gave full support to
     the interim government established in Kyrgyzstan after the uprising in April and provided
     immediate humanitarian assistance. A strategic partnership agreement was signed with
     Kazakhstan. Turkey will chair the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building
     Measures (CICA) in Asia until 2012 and hosted the CICA summit in June. The protocols
     signed with Armenia to normalise relations are still not ratified.




EN                                                 95                                                  EN
      As regards the Middle East, Turkey’s seeks to play a constructive role, notably by offering a
     mediator role between Israel and Syria. Relations with Syria improved substantially with both
     countries lifting visa restrictions and setting up a strategic cooperation council. Turkey
     continues to contribute to stabilisation in Lebanon, through diplomatic activities and its
     participation in UNIFIL. However, relations with Israel deteriorated after the Gaza conflict,
     and in particular following the Gaza flotilla incident.

     Turkey continued its efforts to bring Afghanistan and Pakistan closer. Turkey remains
     engaged in NATO’s International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). It assumed command of
     the Kabul region for the second time as of 31 October 2009. Ambassador Engin Soysal was
     nominated UN special envoy for assistance to Pakistan. Turkey organised two trilateral
     summits in Istanbul and also hosted the Istanbul Summit on Friendship and Cooperation in
     the Heart of Asia. Turkey hosted the fourth Regional Conference on Afghanistan (RECCA).

     Turkey intensified its economic and political ties with Russia and China. The relations
     between Turkey and Russia were marked by an exchange of high-level visits. A high-level
     strategic cooperation council between the two countries was established.

     Turkey continued to intensify its relations with African and Latin American countries. Several
     high-level visits were made by the President and the Prime Minister.

     Relations with the United States have been marked by tensions. Turkey withdrew its
     Ambassador for a short period after the Foreign Relations Committee of the House of
     Representatives adopted a resolution recognising the killings of Armenians in 1915 as
     genocide.

     No particular developments can be reported as regards restrictive measures.

     Concerning non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, Turkey has not aligned itself
     with the EU position on membership of certain suppliers’ groups, such as the Wassenaar
     Arrangement on export controls for conventional arms and dual-use goods and technologies.
     (For dual-use goods, see Chapter 30 — External relations)

     With regard to cooperation with international organisations, Turkey continues holding a non-
     permanent seat in the UN Security Council in 2010. The third forum of the UN-backed
     Alliance of Civilisations was held in Rio in May. Although Turkey is not a member of the
     League of Arab States, it attended the last two meetings of the League and hosted the third
     meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Turkish-Arab Cooperation Forum (TAC). Turkey also
     enjoys observer status in the Organisation of African States. In 2010, a member of the AK
     party was elected president of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. Turkey
     has not signed the statute of the International Criminal Court.

     Turkey extended for one year the navy’s participation in an international task force to join the
     UN-led international anti-piracy coalition in Somalia.

     As regards the common security and defence policy (CSDP), Turkey is continuing to
     contribute to the EU-led military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR/Althea).
     Turkey is also contributing to EUPM, the EU-led police mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
     and to the EU rule of law mission (EULEX) in Kosovo. The issue of EU-NATO cooperation
     that would involve all EU Member States beyond the 'Berlin plus arrangements' remains to be
     resolved.



EN                                                 96                                                   EN
      Conclusion

     Turkey’s alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security policy has continued. Turkey
     has sought dialogue and consultation with the EU on various foreign policy issues. Through
     its ‘zero problems with neighbours’ policy Turkey made efforts to normalise relations with its
     neighbouring countries such as Greece and Armenia (see section 2.3 — Regional issues and
     international obligations), Iraq, including the Kurdish regional government, and Syria.
     Relations with Israel have significantly deteriorated. Turkey is contributing substantially to
     the CSDP and seeking greater involvement in CSDP activities. The issue of EU-NATO
     cooperation that would involve all EU Member States beyond the 'Berlin plus arrangements'
     remains to be resolved. Turkey has not aligned itself with the EU position on membership of
     the Wassenaar Arrangement.

     4.32.   Chapter 32: Financial control

     There has been limited progress on public internal financial control (PIFC), where
     alignment with the acquis is advanced. Budget spending units started to submit their action
     plans for harmonisation with public internal control standards to the central harmonisation
     unit for financial management and control (CHU-FMC), in line with the guide published last
     year.

     The 2002 public internal financial control (PIFC) policy paper and the related action plan
     remain to be updated, following which the Public Financial Management and Control Law
     (PFMCL) will have to be amended. These documents will have to address the issues of
     managerial accountability, delineation of control, audit and inspection functions, as well as
     the establishment of a permanent central harmonisation unit for internal audit (CHU-IA). The
     location of the CHU-IA is crucial to ensure that the modern public internal audit profession
     can develop under optimum conditions. The steering role of the Ministry of Finance in the
     reform process needs to be further reinforced.

     No progress can be reported in the area of external audit. The revised law on the Turkish
     Court of Accounts has been pending in parliament since 2005. This law is to provide the
     institution with the legal and structural bases for its extended mandate and to align audit
     practices with relevant international standards.

     Some progress can be reported on protection of the EU’s financial interests. There has been
     good operational cooperation between the European Anti-fraud Office (OLAF) and the Prime
     Ministerial Inspection Board (PMIB) and the other relevant institutions in assessments and
     investigations of suspected fraud cases. In December 2009 a circular issued by the Prime
     Minister’s Office formally appointed the PMIB as the permanent body responsible for
     cooperation with OLAF and coordination of the fight against fraud (AFCOS). The strategy for
     improving transparency and combating corruption was adopted in February 2010. Further
     efforts are needed to ensure the operational independence of the AFCOS in reporting and
     carrying out its tasks as well as to establish a network to operate horizontally in addressing
     prevention, detection and follow-up issues.

     There have been no developments concerning implementation of the Convention on the
     protection of the European Communities’ financial interests (PIF Convention) and its
     Protocols. The level of monitoring of the actual implementation of the Convention by the
     Turkish authorities remains low. Preparations are moderately advanced in this area.




EN                                                97                                                  EN
      No progress can be reported on the protection of the euro against counterfeiting.
     Institutions serving de facto as the national analysis centre, national coin analysis centre and
     national central office are yet to be formally appointed to ensure sustainable cooperation with
     the EU institutions. The Turkish legislation does not provide for any sanctions against credit
     institutions that fail to withdraw counterfeits from circulation and against medals and tokens
     similar to euro coins. Preparations remain moderately advanced in this field.

     Conclusion

     Limited progress can be reported in the area of financial control, which already shows a fairly
     advanced level of alignment. Legislation implementing the PFMC Law is in place, whilst the
     PIFC policy paper and action plan require revision. The revised law on the Turkish Court of
     Accounts, bringing external audit into line with relevant international standards, has not yet
     been adopted. The Turkish AFCOS has not yet evolved into an operational network.
     Permanent structures are required for contacts with the Commission on the protection of the
     euro against counterfeiting.

     4.33.   Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions

     There have been no particular developments as regards the traditional own resources.
     Alignment with the relevant acquis has continued under the linked acquis chapters, resulting
     in customs legislation that largely complies with the acquis. However, additional efforts are
     needed for full alignment and implementation.

     A national VAT system is in operation, further assessment thereof is needed to ensure the
     system’s appropriateness to allow Turkey to contribute properly to the EU VAT own
     resources system upon accession. As regards the Gross National Income (GNI) resource,
     Turkish financial and statistical data were further aligned with the European System of
     Accounts (ESA 95). Further progress is needed for full implementation of the ESA 95
     standards to ensure that the GNI resource is measured appropriately.

     No progress can be reported in the field of administrative capacity and infrastructure related
     to the application of the own resources system itself. Turkey will need to establish
     coordination structures and implementing rules for accurate collection, monitoring, payment
     and control of own resources, and reporting to the EU.

     Conclusion

     Limited progress has been made under this chapter. Turkey’s alignment with the basic
     principles and institutions of the acquis in this area is well advanced. Sound coordination
     structures, administrative capacity and implementing rules will need to be established in due
     course. Preparedness in the area of the own resources acquis is at an early stage.




EN                                                 98                                                   EN
                                                                                     Statistical Annex
 STATISTICAL DATA (as of 14 October 2010)
 Turkey

 Basic data                                                                         Note    2000      2001      2002      2003      2004      2005       2006       2007       2008        2009
 Population (thousand)                                                               1)    64 259    65 135    66 009    66 873    67 734    68 582     69 421     70 256     71 079      71 897
 Total area of the country (km²)                                                     2)    783 562   783 562   783 562   783 562   783 562   783 562    783 562    783 562    783 562    783 562

 National accounts                                                                  Note    2000      2001      2002      2003      2004       2005       2006       2007       2008      2009
 Gross domestic product (GDP) (million national currency)                                  166 658   240 224   350 476   454 781   559 033   648 932    758 391    843 178    950 534    953 974
 GDP (million euro)                                                                        289 446   219 816   243 570   269 322   314 304   387 655    419 013    472 879    501 339    441 600
 GDP (euro per capita)                                                               1)     4 504     3 375     3 690     4 027     4 640      5 652     6 036      6 731      7 053      6 142
 GDP (in Purchasing Power Standards (PPS) per capita)                                1)    8 000.0   7 400.0   7 400.0   7 400.0   8 600.0   9 100.0b   10 500.0   11 100.0   11 400.0   10 800.0
 GDP per capita in PPS (EU-27 = 100)                                                 1)      41.9      37.4      36.1      35.7      39.6     40.4b       44.3       44.6       45.4       45.8
 Real GDP growth rate (growth rate of GDP volume, national currency, % change on
 previous year)                                                                              6.8       -5.7      6.2       5.3       9.4       8.4         6.9        4.7        0.7       -4.7
 Employment growth (national accounts, % change on previous year)                           -0.4e     -1.0e     -1.8e     -1.0e     3.0e      1.4e        1.3e       1.1e       1.8e         :
 Labour productivity growth: GDP growth per person employed (% change on previous
 year)                                                                                      7.2e      -4.7e     8.1e      6.3e      6.1e       6.9e       5.5e       3.3       -0.7e       -5.1
 Real unit labour cost growth (national accounts, % change on previous year)                  :         :         :         :         :          :          :         :          :           :
 Labour productivity per person employed (GDP in PPS per person employed, EU-27 =
 100)                                                                                       53.2f     49.0f     48.9f     49.6f     53.9f     58.0f      61.4f      62.5f      63.5f      63.4f
 Gross value added by main sectors (%)
      Agriculture and fisheries                                                             10.8       9.4      11.4      11.1      10.7      10.6         9.4        8.5       8.5        9.1
      Industry                                                                              24.6      23.8      23.2      23.5      23.0      23.0        22.9       22.3       22.0      20.8
      Construction                                                                           5.4       4.7       4.6       4.5       5.0       5.0         5.4        5.4        5.2       4.2
      Services                                                                              59.2      62.1      60.8      60.8      61.3      61.3        62.4       63.7       64.3      66.0
 Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%)                                       82.2      80.8      80.8      83.4      83.2      83.5        82.9       84.1       82.7      86.3
 Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%)                                       20.4      15.9      16.7      17.0      20.3      21.0        22.3       21.4       19.9      16.8
 Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%)                                              0.4       -0.9      0.9       0.6       -1.0      -1.0        -0.2       -0.4       1.9       -2.0
 Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                                         20.1      27.4      25.2      23.0      23.6      21.9        22.7       22.3       23.9      23.2
 Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                                         23.1      23.3      23.6      24.0      26.2      25.4        27.6       27.5       28.3      24.3

 Industry                                                                           Note    2000      2001      2002      2003      2004      2005       2006       2007       2008       2009
 Industrial production volume index (2000=100)                                                :         :         :         :         :       100.0      107.8      115.3      114.2      103.2

 Inflation rate                                                                     Note    2000      2001      2002      2003      2004      2005       2006       2007       2008       2009
 Annual average inflation rate (HICP, % change on previous year)                            53.2      56.8      47.0      25.3      10.1       8.1        9.3        8.8       10.4        6.3




EN                                                                                           99                                                                                             EN
  Balance of payments                                                                          Note     2000      2001      2002      2003      2004      2005      2006      2007      2008       2009
 Balance of payments: current account total (million euro)                                           -10 741     4 198     -662     -6 643   -11 601   -17 843   -25 640   -27 954   -28 519    -10 067
 Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro)                                   -23 882    -3 755    -6 758   -11 925   -18 278   -26 590   -32 699   -34 144   -36 049    -17 820
 Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro)                                    12 316     10 201     8 339    9 292    10 288    12 272    10 841     9 737    11 641     11 605
 Balance of payments current account: net income (million euro)                                       -4 333    -5 583    -4 816    -4 912    -4 509    -4 693    -5 301    -5 183    -5 547     -5 500
 Balance of payments current account: net current transfers (million euro)                             5 158     3 335     2 573      902       898      1 169    1 520     1 637     1 437      1 648
      of which government transfers (million euro)                                                      221       224       526       257       252       485      495       590       495        853
 Net foreign direct investment (FDI) (million euro)                                                     121      3 188      993      1 080     1 612    7 208    15 340    14 550    10 688      4 359
 Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro)                                         3)      -942      -555      -151      -424      -627      -855      -736     -1 537    -1 733     -1 114
      of which FDI of the reporting economy in EU-27 countries (million euro)                             :         :         :         :         :         :        :         :         :          :
 Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million euro)                       3)      1 063     3 743     1 144     1 505     2 239    8 063    16 076    16 087    12 421      5 473
      of which FDI of EU-27 countries in the reporting economy (million euro)                             :         :         :         :         :         :        :         :         :          :

 Public finance                                                                               Note     2000     2001      2002      2003      2004      2005      2006      2007       2008      2009
 General government deficit/surplus, relative to GDP (%)                                                 :      -33.0     -12.9     -11.3     -4.5      -0.6       0.8      -1.0       -2.2      -6.7
 General government debt relative to GDP (%)                                                             :      104.4      93.0      85.1     59.2      52.3      46.1      39.4       39.5      45.4

 Financial indicators                                                                         Note     2000      2001     2002      2003      2004       2005     2006       2007     2008       2009
 Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%)                                           44.7      57.7     56.2      47.3      41.2       35.3     39.4      38.4      37.4      43.9
 Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports (%)                                427.0     362.5    359.2     304.9    254.8      231.0     242.7     232.5     210.3     265.5
 Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million euro)                                12 205     8 965    9 291    13 188    15 762     38 978   38 616    44 644    39 927     49 691
 Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up to two years, million euro)               4)     51 591    37 253   36 325    47 398    59 415    150 152   160 193   201 366   203 840   228 237
 Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments, million euro)                               5)     54 207    38 973   38 041    50 488    63 411    164 302   171 832   215 308   214 473   240 246
 Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents (consolidated) (million euro)           44 492    26 977   20 035    29 025    43 328     83 772   100 358   140 157   138 301   153 867
 Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%)                                                   56.0      95.5     49.6      36.1      22.0       15.1     15.8      17.3      16.1       9.2
 Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%)                                               6)       51.2      78.8     53.7      42.8      29.1       23.8     19.0      20.1      19.7      19.7
 Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%)                                               7)       38.2      62.2     53.9      40.3      23.6       19.9     21.5      22.3      22.9      17.2
 euro exchange rates: average of period - 1 euro = … national currency                                 0.574     1.094    1.430     1.685     1.768      1.670    1.800     1.778f    1.896     2.151
 Effective exchange rate index (2000=100)                                                              100.0     46.8e    40.1e     40.4e     39.3e      43.6e    39.1e     44.5e        :         :
 Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro)                                              25 331    22 660   26 949    28 134    27 654     44 277   48 116    52 058    52 442    52 160

 External trade                                                                               Note      2000     2001      2002      2003      2004      2005      2006      2007      2008      2009
 Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro)                                            59 444.4 46 255.8 54 478.3 60 162.6 78 528.0 93 409.5 111 096.0 123 959.4 136 441.0 100 657.6
 Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro)                                             30 181.9 35 062.2 38 137.1 41 679.1 50 891.1 58 849.5 68 020.2 78 126.4 89 557.2 73 304.9
 Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro)                                               -29 262.5 -11 193.5 -16 341.3 -18 483.5 -27 636.9 -34 560.1 -43 075.8 -45 833.0 -46 883.8 -27 352.7
 Terms of trade (export price index / import price index)                                      8)      103.0     100.7     100.1     100.0     102.0     99.3      96.0      103.5     96.9      104.9
 Share of exports to EU-27 countries in value of total exports (%)                                      56.4     56.0      56.6      58.0      57.9      56.4      56.1      56.3      47.9      45.9
 Share of imports from EU-27 countries in value of total imports (%)                                    52.4     47.9      49.8      50.6      49.3      45.2      42.6      40.3      37.0      40.1




EN                                                                                                    100                                                                                         EN
  Demography                                                                             Note     2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009
 Natural growth rate: natural change (births minus deaths) (per 1000 inhabitants)                14.1    13.7    13.5    13.2    12.9    12.6    12.4e   11.4b   11.4    11.2
 Infant mortality rate: deaths of children under one year of age per 1000 live births            31.5    28.4    25.6    23.1    20.9    18.9    17.5    16.7    16.0    15.3
 Life expectancy at birth: male (years)                                                          69.0    69.4    69.8    70.1    70.5    70.9    71.1    71.2    71.4    71.5
 Life expectancy at birth: female (years)                                                        73.1    73.5    73.9    74.3    74.6    75.0    75.3    75.6    75.8    76.1

 Labour market                                                                          Note     2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009
 Economic activity rate (15-64): share of population aged 15-64 that is economically
 active (%)                                                                             9) 10)   52.4    52.3    52.3    51.1    49.6    49.8    49.8    49.8    50.6    51.7
 Employment rate (15-64): share of population aged 15-64 that is in employment (%)               48.9    47.8    46.7    45.5    44.1    44.4    44.6    44.6    44.9    44.3
      Employment rate male (15-64) (%)                                                           71.7    69.3    66.9    65.9    66.4    66.9    66.8    66.8    66.6    64.6
      Employment rate female (15-64) (%)                                                         26.2    26.3    26.6    25.2    22.3    22.3    22.7    22.8    23.5    24.2
 Employment rate of older workers (55-64): share of population aged 55-64 that is in
 employment (%)                                                                          10)     36.4    35.9    35.3    32.7    29.5    27.9    27.6    27.1    27.4    28.2
 Employment by main sectors (%)
      Agriculture                                                                        10)     36.0    37.6    34.9    33.9    29.1    25.7    24.0    23.5    23.7    24.7
      Industry                                                                           10)     17.7    17.5    18.5    18.2    20.0    20.8    20.9    20.8    21.0    19.4
      Construction                                                                       10)      6.3     5.2     4.5     4.6     4.9     5.5     5.9     5.9     5.9     5.9
      Services                                                                           10)     40.0    39.7    42.1    43.4    46.0    48.0    49.2    49.8    49.5    50.0
 Unemployment rate: share of labour force that is unemployed (%)                        9) 10)   6.5     8.4     10.3    10.5    10.8    10.6    10.2    10.3    11.0    14.0
      Share of male labour force that is unemployed (%)                                 9) 10)   6.6     8.7     10.7    10.7    10.8    10.5     9.9    10.0    10.7    13.9
      Share of female labour force that is unemployed (%)                               9) 10)    6.3     7.5     9.4    10.1    11.0    11.2    11.1    11.0    11.6    14.3
 Unemployment rate of persons < 25 years: share of labour force aged <25 that is
 unemployed (%)                                                                         9) 10)   13.1    16.2    19.2    20.5    20.6    19.9    19.1    20.0    20.5    25.3
 Long-term unemployment rate: share of labour force that is unemployed for 12 months
 and more (%)                                                                           9) 10)    1.3     1.7     2.9     2.5     4.2     4.2     3.7     3.1     2.9     3.5

 Social cohesion                                                                        Note     2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009
 Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency)                                    :       :     372.1   492.0   529.4   595.4     :       :       :       :
 Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and salaries divided by the
 CPI) (2000=100)                                                                                   :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :
 Early school leavers - Share of population aged 18-24 with at most lower secondary
 education and not in further education or training (%)                                  10)     58.1    58.1    55.1    52.9    52.2    50.0    49.1    47.2    45.7    44.6

 Standard of living                                                                     Note     2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009
 Number of passenger cars per 1000 population                                           1) 11)    68.8    69.6    69.7   70.3    79.7    84.2    88.5    92.1    95.6    98.7
 Number of subscriptions to cellular mobile telephone services per 1000 population        1)     234.4   280.9   353.3   417.0   512.4   635.9   758.6   882.1   926.1   873.2




EN                                                                                               101                                                                      EN
  Infrastructure                                                                          Note   2000     2001     2002     2003     2004     2005     2006      2007      2008     2009
 Density of railway network (lines in operation, per 1000 km²)                                  11.1     11.1     11.0     11.1     11.1     11.1     11.1      11.1      11.1     11.5
 Length of motorways (thousand km)                                                               1.8      1.9      1.9      1.9      1.9      1.8      2.0       2.0       2.0      2.0

 Innovation and research                                                                 Note   2000     2001     2002     2003     2004     2005     2006      2007      2008     2009
 Spending on human resources (public expenditure on education in % of GDP)                       2.6      2.3      2.8      3.0      3.0      3.1      3.0       3.3       3.0       :
 Gross domestic expenditure on R&D in % of GDP                                                   0.6      0.7      0.7      0.6      0.7      0.8      0.8       0.7       0.7       :
 Percentage of households who have Internet access at home (%)                           12)      :        :        :        :       7.0      8.0       :       19.7      25.4     30.0

 Environment                                                                             Note   2000     2001     2002     2003     2004     2005     2006      2007      2008     2009
 Greenhouse gas emissions, CO2 equivalent (tons, 1990=100)                                      159.0    149.0    153.0    162.0    167.0    176.0    187.0     203.0     196.0      :
 Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1000 euro GDP)                       295.2    293.2    286.8    291.5    279.2    267.1    273.3     282.0     261.5      :
 Electricity generated from renewable sources in % of gross electricity consumption              24.3     19.1     25.6     25.2     30.9     24.7     25.5      19.1      17.3      :
 Road share of inland freight transport (% of tonne-km)                                          94.3     95.3     95.5     94.6     94.4    94.4e     94.3        :         :       :

 Energy                                                                                  Note    2000     2001     2002     2003     2004     2005     2006      2007      2008    2009
 Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE)                                       26 047   24 576   24 281   23 783   24 332   24 549   26 580    27 453    29 257     :
      Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE)                                             2 887    2 679    2 564    2 494    2 389    2 395    2 284    2 241     2 268      :
      Primary production of hard coal and lignite (thousand TOE)                                12 487   12 282   11 360   10 777   10 532   11 213   13 087    14 797    16 674     :
      Primary production of natural gas (thousand TOE)                                            582      284      344      510      644      816      839      827        931      :
 Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE)                                              54 291   49 536   54 234   60 505   63 232   67 266   73 256    80 596    77 413     :
 Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE)                                                 80 500   75 402   78 331   83 826   87 818   91 074   99 642   107 625   106 338     :
 Electricity generation (thousand GWh)                                                          124.9    122.7    129.4    140.6    150.7    162.0    176.3     191.6     198.4    194.1

 Agriculture                                                                             Note   2000     2001     2002     2003     2004     2005     2006      2007      2008     2009
 Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (producer prices, previous
 year=100)                                                                                       104.2    93.3     108.5    98.0     101.6    106.9      :        :         :         :
 Total utilised agricultural area (thousand hectare)                                            38 757   40 967   41 196   40 645   41 210   41 223   40 496   39 505    39 073    38 935
 Livestock: cattle (thousand heads, end of period)                                       13)    10 761   10 548   9 803    9 788    10 069   10 526   10 871   11 037    10 860    10 724
 Livestock: pigs (thousand heads, end of period)                                                   3        3        4        7        4        2        1        2         2         2
 Livestock: sheep and goats (thousand heads, end of period)                                     35 693   33 994   31 954   32 203   31 811   31 822   32 260   31 749    29 568    26 878
 Production and utilisation of milk on the farm (total whole milk, thousand tonnes)                :        :        :        :        :        :        :        :         :         :
 Crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand tonnes, harvested production)              32 108   29 426   30 686   30 658   33 957   36 471   34 642   29 256    29 287    33 577
 Crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes, harvested production)                            18 821   12 633   16 523   12 623   13 517   15 181   14 452   12 415    15 488    17 275
 Crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes, harvested production)                            22 357   21 930   23 698   24 018   23 215   24 320   24 017   25 676    27 214    26 780

 : = not available
 p = provisional value
 e = estimated value
 f = forecast




EN                                                                                              102                                                                                  EN
  1) Mid-year population estimates
 2) Including lakes.
 3) The balance of payments sign conventions are used. For FDI abroad a minus sign means investment abroad by the reporting economy exceeded its disinvestment in the period, while an entry without
 sign means disinvestment exceeded investment. For FDI in the reporting economy an entry without sign means that investment into the reporting economy exceeded disinvestment, while a minus sign
 indicates that disinvestment exceeded investment.
 4) Before December 2005, M2 included M1 and time deposits (TRY). From December 2005 onwards, M2 included M1 and time deposits (TRY,FX); central Bank of Turkey (CBRT) buying rate is used when
 converting money supply data in national currency (TRY) to Euro; monetary liabilities of Participation Banks, Investment and Development Banks and amount of Money Market Funds are added to money
 supply data beginning from December 2005.
 5) Before December 2005, M3 included M2 and official deposits (time/demand). From December 2005 onwards, M3 included M2, fund received from repo transactions and money market funds (B type liquid
 funds). Also beginning from December 2005, deposits of Central Government are removed from M3 and other general government deposit items are classified in M1 and M2 according to maturity; central
 Bank of Turkey (CBRT) buying rate is used when converting money supply data in national currency (TRY) to Euro; monetary liabilities of Participation Banks, Investment and Development Banks and
 amount of Money Market Funds are added to money supply data beginning from December 2005.
 6) Averages of monthly data, lending to enterprises more than one year.
 7) Averages of monthly data, up to one year or longer.
 8) Calculated on the basis of ISIC Rev.3, base year 2003 as Paasche.
 9) Unemployment is not defined according to the standard ILO concept. A wider definition is used resulting in higher unemployment and economic activity rates. For example, the unemployment rate for
 2009 would be 1.5 percentage points lower following the standard ILO definition, and the unemployment rate of persons < 25 years of age would be 2.6 percentage points lower.
 10) From 2004 onwards, calculated according to mid-year population estimates.
 11) From 2004 onwards, data source is the General Directorate of Public Security.
 12) From 2007 onwards, calculated according to mid-year population estimates.
 13) Excluding the number of buffaloes.




EN                                                                                               103                                                                                                EN

