                      EUROPEAN
                      COMMISSION




                                            Brussels, 8.10.2014
                                            SWD(2014) 307 final




               COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

                                 TURKEY
                          2014 PROGRESS REPORT

                          Accompanying the document

        COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN
     PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
           COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS


              Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2014-2015

                            {COM(2014) 700 final}




EN                                                                 EN
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.      Introduction .................................................................................................................. 3
1.1.    Preface.......................................................................................................................... 3
1.2.    Context ......................................................................................................................... 3
1.3.    Relations between the EU and Turkey......................................................................... 3
2.      Political criteria and enhanced political dialogue ........................................................ 5
2.1.    Democracy and the rule of law .................................................................................... 5
2.2.    Human rights and the protection of minorities .......................................................... 14
2.3.    Regional issues and international obligations ............................................................ 18
3.      Economic criteria ....................................................................................................... 20
3.1.    The existence of a functioning market economy ....................................................... 20
3.2.    The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union
        .................................................................................................................................... 24
4.      Ability to take on the obligations of membership...................................................... 25
4.1.    Chapter 1: Free movement of goods .......................................................................... 26
4.2.    Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers .......................................................... 27
4.3.    Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services ......................... 27
4.4.    Chapter 4: Free movement of capital ......................................................................... 28
4.5.    Chapter 5: Public procurement................................................................................... 28
4.6.    Chapter 6: Company law............................................................................................ 29
4.7.    Chapter 7: Intellectual property law........................................................................... 30
4.8.    Chapter 8: Competition policy ................................................................................... 31
4.9.    Chapter 9: Financial services ..................................................................................... 31
4.10.   Chapter 10: Information society and media ............................................................... 32
4.11.   Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development......................................................... 33
4.12.   Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy .................................. 34
4.13.   Chapter 13: Fisheries.................................................................................................. 35
4.14.   Chapter 14: Transport policy ..................................................................................... 35
4.15.   Chapter 15: Energy .................................................................................................... 36
4.16.   Chapter 16: Taxation.................................................................................................. 38
4.17.   Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy.............................................................. 38
4.18.   Chapter 18: Statistics.................................................................................................. 39
4.19.   Chapter 19: Social policy and employment ............................................................... 39
4.20.   Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy.............................................................. 41
4.21.   Chapter 21: Trans-European networks....................................................................... 42
4.22.   Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments .................. 42
4.23.   Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights ........................................................... 43

                                                                   1
 4.24.        Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security ................................................................. 62
4.25.        Chapter 25: Science and research .............................................................................. 66
4.26.        Chapter 26: Education and culture............................................................................. 67
4.27.        Chapter 27: Environment and climate change ........................................................... 68
4.28.        Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection............................................................. 70
4.29.        Chapter 29: Customs union........................................................................................ 71
4.30.        Chapter 30: External relations.................................................................................... 72
4.31.        Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy...................................................... 72
4.32.        Chapter 32: Financial control..................................................................................... 74
4.33.        Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions........................................................ 75
Statistical Annex ...................................................................................................................... 76




                                                                    2
 1.       INTRODUCTION
1.1.     Preface
This report largely follows the same structure as the Commission’s previous regular reports to
the Council and the Parliament on progress made by Turkey in preparing for EU membership.
The report:
– briefly describes the relations between Turkey and the European Union;
– analyses the situation in Turkey in terms of the political criteria for membership;
– analyses the situation in Turkey on the basis of the economic criteria for membership;
– reviews Turkey’s capacity to take on the obligations of membership, i.e. the acquis
  expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation, and the policies of the European Union.
This report covers the period from October 2013 to September 2014. Progress is measured on
the basis of decisions taken, legislation adopted and measures implemented. As a rule,
legislation or measures which are under preparation or awaiting parliamentary approval have
not been taken into account. This approach ensures equal treatment across all reports and
enables an objective assessment.
The report is based on information gathered and analysed by the Commission. Many sources
have been used, including contributions from the government of Turkey, the EU Member
States, European Parliament reports1 and information from various international and non-
governmental organisations.
The Commission draws detailed conclusions regarding Turkey in its separate Communication
on enlargement,2 based on the technical analysis contained in this report.
1.2.     Context
The European Council granted the status of candidate country to Turkey in December 1999.
Accession negotiations were opened in October 2005. The Association Agreement between
Turkey and the then European Economic Community entered into force in December 1964.
Turkey and the EU formed a customs union in 1995.
1.3.     Relations between the EU and Turkey
The Positive Agenda, launched in 2012, continued to support and complement the accession
negotiations through enhanced cooperation in a number of areas of joint interest: political
reforms; alignment with the acquis; dialogue on foreign policy, visas, mobility and migration,
trade, energy, counter-terrorism; and participation in EU programmes. The Commission
expressed serious concerns about developments in the area of the rule of law and fundamental
rights. It encouraged Turkey to have deeper dialogue with the Commission while preparing
new initiatives and legislation and regarding the implementation of existing laws and policies.
This was supported by a series of peer assessments aiming at renewed cooperation on Chapter
23 — Judiciary and fundamental rights.
Turkey continued to express its commitment to EU accession. The then Prime Minister and
current President Erdoğan declared 2014 to be the ‘Year of the European Union’. In January,
he visited Brussels and met with the Presidents of the European Council, the European
Commission and the European Parliament. In September, Turkey adopted a ‘European Union
Strategy’ intended to re-invigorate its accession process. The Strategy is based on three
pillars: political reforms; socio-economic transformation in the accession process;

1
       Until 1 July 2014, the rapporteur for Turkey was Ms Ria Oomen-Ruijten. The current rapporteur is
       Ms Kati Piri.
2
       Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2014-15, COM(2014) 700.

                                                  3
 communication strategy. It is expected to be followed up by action plans with concrete actions
and timelines.
The EU-Turkey Readmission agreement was signed on 16 December 2013, in parallel with
the launching of the visa liberalisation dialogue. A series of peer assessments have been
conducted in order to assess the status of Turkey’s implementation of the visa roadmap. The
readmission agreement has been ratified by the EU and Turkey and it came into force on 1
October. Full and effective implementation vis-à-vis all Member States is crucial.
 Turkey and the EU continued work to improve their cooperation on energy, extending its
scope to nuclear and sustainable energy.
Turkey’s readiness to start accession negotiations on individual chapters was assessed on the
basis of screening reports. Of a total of 33 reports, nine are pending in the Council. Work on a
number of negotiating chapters has been interrupted over the years, due to lack of consensus
among Member States.
So far, accession negotiations have been opened on 14 chapters (science and research;
enterprise and industry; statistics; financial control; trans-European networks; consumer and
health protection; intellectual property law; company law; information society and media; free
movement of capital; taxation; environment; food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy;
and regional policy and coordination of structural instruments). One of these (science and
research) was provisionally closed. Chapter 22 — regional policy and coordination of
structural instruments, was officially opened in November 2013.
The conclusions on Turkey that were adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External
Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December
2006 remain in force. They stipulate that negotiations will not be opened on eight chapters3
relating to Turkey’s restrictions regarding the Republic of Cyprus and no chapter will be
provisionally closed until the Commission confirms that Turkey has fully implemented the
Additional Protocol to the Association Agreement. As long as these restrictions remain in
place on vessels and aircraft that are registered in Cyprus, vessels of any nationality related to
the Republic of Cyprus in terms of ownership or ship management, or whose last port of call
was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be in position to fully implement the acquis relating to these
eight chapters.
The enhanced political dialogue between the EU and Turkey continued. A political dialogue
meeting at ministerial level took place in February, followed by a meeting at political
directors’ level in March 2014. In line with the call in the December Council conclusions to
further develop dialogue and cooperation on foreign policy issues, regular discussions were
also held on, inter alia, Syria, North Africa, the Horn of Africa, the Middle East and the Gulf,
the Middle East peace process, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Russia, Ukraine, the South Caucasus,
Central Asia, and on counter-terrorism, foreign fighters and non-proliferation. Turkey
continues to be actively involved in its wider neighbourhood and is a key regional player. The
Council recognised Turkey’s role on Syria, in particular with regard to significant
humanitarian support provided to Syrians fleeing violence across the border. A number of
high-level visits to the European institutions took place during the reporting period.
Progress on the priorities for reform is encouraged and monitored by the bodies set up under
the Association Agreement. The Association Committee and the Association Council met in
June 2014.




3
       Free movement of goods, right of establishment and freedom to provide services, financial services,
       agriculture and rural development, fisheries, transport policy, customs union, and external relations.

                                                    4
 Turkey participates in multilateral economic dialogue with the Commission and Member
States to prepare the country for participation in multilateral surveillance and economic policy
coordination as part of the EU’s Economic and Monetary Union.
Upon request of the Commission, the World Bank carried out an evaluation of the EU-Turkey
Customs Union and published its final report in April 2014.4 The report highlighted the
positive economic impact of the customs union on both parties. It also recommended
broadening mutual trade relations and addressing a number of issues related to the functioning
of the customs union. On this basis, discussions on a possible follow-up of these
recommendations have started between the Commission and Turkey.
Turkey continues to be the EU’s sixth largest trading partner, while the EU is Turkey’s
largest. Two out of five goods traded by Turkey come from or go to the EU and over 70 % of
foreign direct investment in Turkey — with a strong high-technology component — comes
from the EU.
The Commission and Turkey established priorities for financial assistance under the new
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (IPA II), set out in the Indicative Strategy Paper for
Turkey for the period 2014-2020. This key document was presented to the IPA committee in
July and adopted on 26 August. Reforms relating to the rule of law and fundamental rights,
home affairs, and civil society are to receive increased funding compared to IPA I. Other
priorities include education, employment and social policies. In the sectors of environment,
transport, and energy, IPA II will focus on promoting development towards a resource-
efficient, low carbon economy and on increasing inter-connectivity between Turkey and the
EU. In the areas of agriculture and rural development, work will focus on food safety,
veterinary and phytosanitary policy and agriculture and fisheries. These priorities will be used
as the basis for sector programmes promoting structural reforms, allowing more targeted
assistance and improving the impact of financial assistance.
Turkey participates in the following EU programmes: the Seventh Research Framework
Programme, Customs, Fiscalis, the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme,
Progress, Culture, Lifelong Learning and Youth in Action. Turkey has also recently
concluded or is in the process of concluding new agreements for a number of programmes,
including: Horizon 2020, Erasmus+, Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises, Creative Europe and Employment and Social Innovation. Turkey
participates in the European Environmental Agency and in the European Monitoring Centre
for Drugs and Drug Addiction.

2.          POLITICAL CRITERIA AND ENHANCED POLITICAL DIALOGUE
This section examines progress made by Turkey towards meeting the Copenhagen political
criteria, which require stable institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human
rights, and respect for and the protection of minorities. It also monitors compliance with
international obligations, regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations with
enlargement countries and Member States.
2.1.        Democracy and the rule of law
On 11 June, the Turkish parliament adopted a law to ‘bring a stronger legal foundation to the
settlement process’ aiming at a solution of the Kurdish issue. The law was adopted with broad
support across political parties. It encompasses measures to eliminate terrorism, strengthen
social inclusion, reintegrate those who leave the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and lay
down their arms, and prepare public opinion for the return of former fighters. It also provides

4
    http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/eca/turkey/tr-eu-customs-union-eng.pdf.


                                                      5
 guarantees that those taking part in the settlement process would not be prosecuted for
carrying out their duties assigned within the scope of this law. The law entered into force on 1
October 2014. The EU extended its full support to this process and encouraged further
engagement by all parties. The law strengthened the basis for the settlement process and
makes a positive contribution to stability and protection of human rights in Turkey.
Constitution
The parliamentary Conciliation Committee achieved preliminary consensus on close to 60 of
approximately 170 articles for a new constitution. Following persistent lack of consensus, the
ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) pulled out of the committee in November 2013.
The committee was formally dissolved in December. Civil society and business organisations
called on all parties to act responsibly and continue the process. Minutes of all of the
committee’s deliberations, covering almost 300 sessions, were published on parliament’s
website.
There was no progress on adopting laws implementing provisions on protection of personal
data, military justice, or laws introducing affirmative-action measures to promote gender
equality, which have been pending since the relevant 2010 constitutional amendments were
adopted.
Overall, constitutional reform process was put on hold. Yet, it would constitute the most
credible avenue for advancing further democratisation of Turkey, providing for the separation
of powers and adequate checks and balances guaranteeing freedom, democracy, equality, the
rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of people belonging to
minorities. Future work should build on the democratic and inclusive process, involving broad
consultation that characterised the work of the parliamentary Conciliation Committee. Active
consultation with the Venice Commission should be pursued.
Elections
The first direct presidential elections took place on 10 August. The candidate of the ruling
party and outgoing Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan was elected President in the first
round with 51.79 % of the votes, whereas the consensus candidate of several opposition
parties, including Republican’s People Party (CHP) and Nationalist Movement Party (MHP),
Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu came second with 38.44 %, and the candidate of the People’s
Democracy Party (HDP), Selahattin Demirtaş, secured 9.76 %. Turnout was at 74.13 %, low
compared to other previous elections, and particularly low among expatriate voters (8.31 % -
around 2.7 million Turkish voters residing abroad were, for the first time, able to vote in the
presidential elections at Turkish diplomatic missions in their country of residence). A joint
international observation mission of the OSCE and the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe found in its preliminary report that candidates were generally able to
campaign freely and the right to freedom of assembly and association was respected.
However, it voiced concerns over the use by the Prime Minister- presidential candidate of his
official position as well as over-biased media coverage, giving him a ‘distinct advantage’ over
other candidates. The mission also noted that the legal framework was generally conducive to
the conduct of democratic elections, although key areas were in need of improvements, such
as campaign finance, comprehensive reporting, and sanctions, which limited the transparency
and accountability of the process.
Local elections took place on 30 March 2014, with a turnout of 89 %. Elections were re-run in
two provinces on 1 June. AKP won control of municipalities in 48 provinces, CHP in 14,
Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) in 10, the nationalist MHP in 8 and an
independent candidate in 1. The elections were well-organised overall and were held in
broadly peaceful circumstances, including in the southeast of the country. However, the
campaign was polarised and tense, and allegations of fraud sparked protests in a number of

                                               6
 cities. Results of the elections were contested in many municipalities and a high number of
appeals were lodged, leading in 13 cases to changes in the results.
The elections took place without adequate legal and institutional framework to audit
campaign budgets, donations and candidates’ asset disclosures. Following partial alignment
with the 2012 recommendations by the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) in their
third round of evaluation on political funding and incrimination, no further reform of the
provisions for political funding has taken place. Shortcomings remained in the political
funding rules relating to, inter alia, prohibited funding sources, donation ceilings and
obligations on candidates to disclose their assets and submit specified financial information
during a campaign.
Three female metropolitan mayors were elected in Aydın (CHP), Diyarbakır (BDP) and
Gaziantep (AKP). One female provincial mayor was elected in Hakkari (BDP). However,
women’s political representation at local level remained low.
Overall, the presidential elections took place in an orderly fashion, but the campaign period
raised concerns over the misuse of state resources to the benefit of the Prime Minister and
over insufficient impartiality in media coverage. Turkey needs to take advantage of the
recommendations of the Council of Europe and OSCE and remedy remaining shortcomings in
the legal framework for presidential elections. The local elections were well-organised and
held in broadly peaceful circumstances, including across the southeast. The record number of
objections to the preliminary results was symptomatic of a marked polarisation in the country.
The shortcomings related to the political funding rules following GRECO recommendations
should be addressed.
Parliament
The Constitutional Court ruled that the right to be elected had been violated in the case of six
MPs-elect detained pending trial. They were released and took their oath in parliament.
Shortcomings in anti-terror legislation and restrictive interpretation of Article 14 of the
Constitution continued to pose a risk to MPs’ freedom of expression.
The wide scope of parliamentary immunity in relation to corruption charges remained
unchanged. In May, parliament set up a single parliamentary investigation committee into
corruption allegations involving former ministers. The committee has been tasked to advise
the plenary to authorise or refuse trials for the accused MPs before the Constitutional Court.
After two-month delay due to the failure of the AKP to nominate its members, the committee
was finally established on 8 July, with 15 members, of whom nine from the AKP, four from
the CHP and one each from the MHP and the BDP/HDP. On 14 July, the Chairman of the
Committee sent the file back to the prosecutors on the grounds that it lacked an index of the
content. One opposition member of the Committee resigned in protest for the delays. At the
end of August, the Committee began the examination of the charges.
Nine AKP MPs resigned from the party in protest at the government’s handling of corruption
allegations and the closing of the Dershanes.5 Ten MPs resigned from parliament as a result
of their election as mayors in the 30 March local elections. All except one MP from the BDP
switched their allegiance to the new pro-Kurdish People’s Democracy Party (HDP).
Subsequently, the distribution of seats in parliament was: AKP 313, CHP 130, MHP 52, HDP
27, Independent 14, Democratic Regions Party (DBP former BDP) 1, vacant 13.
On 31 October 2013, following changes in the regulation on the dress code for civil servants,
a number of AKP female deputies attended the plenary wearing headscarves, ending a
decades-old ban. The change, in turn, triggered an amendment to parliament’s internal rules,
allowing female MPs to wear trousers.

5
       Private preparatory schools for higher education exams.

                                                     7
 A law adopted in March as part of the September 2013 democratisation package made
changes to the legal framework in relation to elections and political parties. It permitted
political campaigning in languages other than Turkish, legalised party co-chairmanship and
eased the rules governing the local organisation of political parties. The expansion of the
scope of funding to political parties that attain more than 3 % of votes in parliamentary
elections (as opposed to the currently in force two-tire regime with 7 % and 10 % threshold)
will apply following the next such elections. However, the new rules will not apply where
MPs are elected as independent and subsequently form a political group in parliament, which
is currently the case of the pro-Kurdish BDP/HDP.
A debate on the 10 % threshold for representation in parliament, the highest among Council of
Europe member countries, was opened following the adoption of September 2013
democratisation package. However, it was decided not to revise the threshold before the next
general elections. A 10 % threshold is also still used for elections to municipal and provincial
councils.
Major concerns remained relating to transparency and accountability in controlling funding
for political parties and election campaigns (see below — Fight against corruption).
Parliament’s ability to perform its key functions of law-making and oversight of the executive
were hampered by a persistent lack of dialogue and a lack of a will to compromise among
political parties.
The pattern of insufficient preparation and consultation before adopting key legislation
continued. Government- and AKP-sponsored legislation amending laws on the internet, the
judiciary, the closure of Dershanes and the National Intelligence Service, were adopted
without proper parliamentary debate or adequate consultation of stakeholders and civil
society.
Parliament has been involved in the settlement process aimed at solving the Kurdish issue. It
adopted the law bringing a stronger legal foundation to the process. An ad hoc parliamentary
Inquiry Committee for Societal Peace and Assessment of the Settlement Process, established
in May 2013 with participation of members from only AKP and BDP, presented a report on 2
December urging the continuation of the settlement process, praising the work of the
government and supporting redress in the case of past grievances. However, BDP released a
dissenting opinion.
A Security and Intelligence Committee is envisaged to be established in the wake of the
adoption of the law revising the functioning and oversight of the National Intelligence
Service, however the authority and tasks to be granted to the committee are limited. Besides
an advisory function, it will only have the power to review a report prepared by the Prime
Ministry on the basis of intelligence agencies’ annual reports.
The absence of a specialised committee within parliament with technical expertise weakened
parliamentary follow-up to reports from the Turkish Court of Accounts and oversight of
public spending. In addition, there was no progress on improving parliamentary oversight of
the executive and public expenditure, most notably military expenditure, a problem
exacerbated by weaknesses in the Turkish Court of Accounts’ legal framework.
Work on a comprehensive reform of parliamentary rules and procedures, re-launched in
December 2012, was, once again, abandoned due to lack of consensus among the political
parties.
The Parliament continued to meet regularly the European Parliament in the framework of the
Joint Parliamentary Committee.
Overall, there were welcome improvements to the legal framework on political parties,
including use of languages and access to funding. However, full alignment with European

                                               8
 standards needs to be ensured. An inclusive and consultative approach to law-making remains
the exception rather than the rule. The transparency of the legislative process and
consultations with all relevant stakeholders needs to become a regular practice. Political
polarisation and a lack of readiness on the part of the government and opposition to work
towards consensus on key reforms continued to affect the functioning of parliament.
President
The mandate of the former President, Abdullah Gül, expired on 28 August. During the
reporting period he has been stressing the need for political reforms in line with Turkey’s EU
accession process. He maintained a conciliatory role, warning against the polarisation of
Turkish society.
He was criticised by the opposition for endorsing government- and AKP-sponsored
legislation adopted by parliament, notably amendments to laws on the internet, the judiciary,
the closure of Dershanes and on the National Intelligence Service. The former President
pushed for improvements in legislation on the internet and the High Council for Judges and
Prosecutors, explicitly stating that the Constitutional Court must judge the constitutionality of
other parts of the legislation. He also criticised the bans on accessing Twitter and YouTube,
publicly questioning the proportionality of the measures taken by the authorities.
The new President, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, took his oath on 28 August. In his inauguration
speech he vowed to serve as a President for all people of Turkey, to build a ‘new Turkey’ by
bringing forward a new constitution and to continue with ambitious development plans. He
also declared that the accession negotiations remain a strategic target for Turkey.
Government
For most of the year, attention was drawn to the 17 and 25 December 2013 corruption
allegations targeting the Prime Minister, four ministers, their relatives, the head of the biggest
public bank, public officials and businessmen. Ten out of twenty-five ministers were replaced
in a Cabinet reshuffle on 25 December. There was a significant delay in submitting requests
to parliament to lift the immunity of four former ministers implicated in corruption
allegations.
In response to the allegations of corruption, the government alleged that there had been an
attempted judicial coup by a ‘parallel structure’ within the state, controlled by the Gülen
Movement. Prosecutors and police officers in charge of the original investigations of 17 and
25 December were removed from their posts. A significant number of reassignments and
dismissals in the police, civil service and the judiciary followed, accompanied by legal
measures in the judiciary. A significant number of police officers were detained. In
September, the Istanbul Chief Prosecutor’s Office decided not to prosecute 96 suspects
allegedly involved in the December corruption case.
As part of that response, key legislation, including on the High Council of Judges and
Prosecutors and on the internet, was drafted and adopted in haste and without consultations.
Following the election and inauguration as President of Mr Erdoğan, a new government was
appointed on 29 August, led by Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu who has also succeeded to
Mr Erdoğan as leader of the AKP. The 62nd government was confirmed in parliament on 6
September on the basis of a programme that listed the EU accession process, the further
democratisation, the constitutional changes and the settlement process as its first priorities,
while being also largely dedicated to the socio-economic development of Turkey.
The ministerial Reform Monitoring Group, in which key ministers coordinate policies for EU
integration, met twice. A circular aiming at increasing the coordination role of the Ministry of
EU Affairs on draft legislation prepared for alignment with the EU legislation was adopted in
September.

                                                9
 Elections for local government were conducted on 30 March, for the first time since the 2012
amendment to the Law on Metropolitan Municipalities, which redrew municipal boundaries
and extended the scope of municipalities’ competences. There was no progress in devolving
power to local governments. Fiscal decentralisation remained very limited. Local
governments’ proportion of government revenues and expenditures in 2013 was below 10 %.
The government has not taken forward its January 2013 plans to legalise the provision of
public services in languages other than Turkish — notably, Kurdish — as recommended by
the Council of Europe.
Overall, the government response to corruption allegations, which amounted to interfering of
the executive into the independence, impartiality and efficiency of the judiciary, raised serious
concerns. This led to further polarisation of political climate. The practice of adopting key
policies and proposing legislation with no or insufficient consultation continued.
Public administration
Turkey does not yet have in place a comprehensive strategic framework for public
administration reform. A public administration reform strategy has to be adopted and a
body responsible for its coordination needs to be set up.
With regard to policy development and coordination, no progress was made on developing
regulatory impact assessments to increase the quality of legislation. In particular, no
regulatory impact assessment was conducted prior to adopting key legislation. The continuing
gap between strategic planning and the budgetary process weakens the implementation of
government policies.
With regard to public service and human resources management, following the December
2013 corruption allegations (see above — Government) reassignments of judges, prosecutors,
police officers and other civil servants risk further politicising and undermining the efficiency
of the public administration. Civil service reforms to improve management of the public
sector and its human resources and to ensure merit-based advancement are still needed.
Ministerial power over independent regulatory authorities, which runs counter to EU
legislation, remained in place.
Service delivery was improved in terms of administrative simplification and the online
provision of basic public services (e-government), whereas there was no progress with regard
to accountability.
Turkey has engaged in reforms in different parts of the public financial management
system, but there is no comprehensive reform programme. Turkey has a medium-term
budgetary framework in place, and the government has a track record of taking corrective
action when necessary. Turkey continued to implement strategic planning (five-year plans)
and performance budgeting (on annual basis) in line with the Framework Law on Public
Financial Management and Control. The annual budgeting process is based on transparent
rules but sets short deadlines for line ministries. Expenditure from own resources (‘revolving
funds’) is outside the scope of the general budget. A clear cash and debt management policy is
in place. However, in some cases local administration and state-owned enterprises may
borrow without Treasury approval
Overall, limited progress was made with regard to public administration reform. There was
significant concern that removals and reassignments of civil servants would threaten the
efficiency of the public administration and further politicise it. Public financial management
needs to be further strengthened.
Ombudsman
By September 2014 the Ombudsman Institution addressed 2170 out of 3502 received
complaints. They related mainly to human rights, the rights of people with disabilities, civil

                                               10
 service-related matters, social security, property rights as well as financial, economic and tax
issues. Out of the addressed applications approximately 35 % were found inadmissible and
35 % were referred to a relevant administrative/judicial body. The Ombudsman issued 56
recommendations and 60 complaints were finalised through an arbitration procedure. The
administration took action on just 5 of the issued recommendations. Amendments covering
the right of own initiative, on-the-spot checks and follow-up to the Ombudsman’s
recommendations have not been adopted. As regards administrative acts of the Turkish
Armed Forces, the Ombudsman considered notably a number of complaints on dismissal and
mistreatment during the military service to be admissible.
The Ombudsman’s recommendations referred to relevant European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) judgments enshrining fundamental democratic principles such as the presumption of
innocence, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of assembly, and prevention
of excessive use of force by law enforcement officers.
Following a number of complaints received on use of force by police officers during the Gezi
protests, the Ombudsman issued a report in which it found disproportionate use of force. The
report also made a number of recommendations related to i.a. the harmonisation of the
Turkish legal framework with European standards, the gradual and proportionate use of force,
only when it is essential and under supervision, and the continuous training for law
enforcement officers.
The Ombudsman Institution’s annual report was submitted to a Joint Committee in
parliament. After being presented at the plenary, the annual report is expected to be published
in the Official Gazette. The institution joined the European Ombudsman Institute and
participated in the European Network of Ombudsmen. The Institution has increased staff level
and provided in-house training for the newly recruited personnel.
Overall, the work of the Ombudsman Institution contributed to raising awareness of citizens’
fundamental rights. The Ombudsman delivered recommendations in line with ECtHR rulings
on key issues, such as freedom of assembly and preventing disproportionate use of force by
law enforcement officers. The institution needs to contribute pro-actively to raising awareness
and continue consolidating civil society’s trust in it. Work is needed to ensure that the
institution has the right to act upon its own initiative and to conduct on-the-spot checks.
Measures to ensure adequate follow-up of recommendations by the national administration
should be adopted, as well as parliamentary follow-up.
Civilian oversight of the security forces
The General Staff abstained from commenting on political issues beyond its professional
remit, except in one instance as regards the settlement process.
Amendments to the law on the National Intelligence Service, adopted in April 2014, accorded
the service exceptionally broad powers. It extended the scope of the service’s duties,
increased the already broad immunity of its staff and increased its access to information from
all public institutions and banks, without restrictions and without adequate judicial or
parliamentary oversight. In February, a law was adopted, requiring authorisation by both the
Prime Minister and the Interior Minister for any prosecution of the Chief of General Staff and
force commanders for offences related to their duties.
Access to audit reports from the Turkish Court of Accounts on security, defence and
intelligence agencies remains restricted. Amendments to the intelligence service law gave the
service to access the off-budget Defence Industry Support Fund with the authorisation of the
Minister of National Defence and the Prime Minister, further limiting financial transparency
in the security sector.



                                              11
 In October, military service was reduced from 15 to 12 months. Awareness of conscripts’
rights increased, with civil initiatives undertaken to prevent maltreatment, forced excessive
physical activity and torture. No step was taken to recognise conscientious objection.
Increasing civilian control of the Armed Forces will require legal provisions on the
composition and powers of the Supreme Military Council to be amended. The Chief of the
General Staff continued to report to the Prime Minister rather than the Minister of Defence.
Further reforms are needed to the Law on Provincial Administrations, which is used as the
legal basis to involve the Armed Forces in domestic security operations, in order to give
civilian authorities broader oversight of military operations. In particular, civilian oversight by
governors of the Turkish gendarmerie’s law enforcement activities remained insufficient.
In October, the Sledgehammer trial ended, with the Court of Cassation approving the
conviction of 237 defendants for attempting to overthrow the government in 2003. However,
in June, the Constitutional Court ruled that the defendants’ rights to a fair trial had been
violated and 99 defendants were subsequently released. The judgment of the Court opens the
way for a re-trial.
Judicial investigations continued into the 1980 coup and the 28 February ‘postmodern coup’
of 1997. In June, the surviving leaders of the 1980 coup were sentenced to life imprisonment.
In December, all suspects on remand were released under judicial supervision in the 28
February ‘postmodern coup’ case.
In April the Istanbul 13th Serious Crimes Court issued a reasoned decision in the Ergenekon
case. However, the former chief of staff, sentenced to life imprisonment, had been released in
March by decision of the Constitutional Court, on the grounds that he had been ‘unlawfully
deprived of his freedom’. As a result of the court’s decision, 52 people convicted in the
Ergenekon case were released.
Military and civilian judicial investigations into the December 2011 Uludere/Roboski
incident, in which 34 civilians were killed in an air strike conducted by the Turkish military,
remained inconclusive. The General Staff Military Prosecutor’s Office ruled that five military
suspects should not be prosecuted. The decision acknowledged operational errors by the
military hierarchy, but nevertheless concluded that the air strike was legally authorised.
Overall, civilian oversight of the army remained stable and there was no progress regarding
civilian oversight of the intelligence service. Judicial scrutiny of intelligence was considerably
narrowed and financial transparency of the sector was further limited. Reforms are needed to
improve civilian scrutiny of the military, the police, the gendarmerie and the intelligence
services. The Constitutional Court rulings highlighted the mishandling of the investigations
and subsequent trials in the Ergenekon and Sledgehammer cases. The opportunity to establish
the veracity of the initial serious allegations has been missed.
Civil society
The development of an active civil society in Turkey continued. The Ministry of the Interior
consulted civil society actors when preparing a law on the collection of aid for associations
and other significant reforms. However, apart from such ad hoc consultations, there are no
structured participatory mechanisms whereby civil society organisations are able to take an
active part in legislative and policymaking process. Government-civil society and parliament-
civil society relations should be improved through systematic, permanent and structured
consultation mechanisms at policy level, as part of the legislative process and with regard to
non-legislative acts at all levels of administration.
Civil society organisations continued to be subject to disproportionate state supervision
affecting their operations, in particular through auditing. Other legislation continued to be
interpreted restrictively vis-à-vis civil society organisations. Concentrating such functions as

                                                12
 the registration of associations, fiscal supervision and prevention of illegal activities in a
single department of the Ministry of the Interior may lead to restrictive drafting and
interpretation of the relevant legislation.
Instead of encouraging domestic private funding of civil society organisations through
measures like tax incentives, Turkey continued to complicate their financial management
through often disproportionate accountancy requirements. At the same time, public funding
for civil society organisations was not sufficiently transparent and rule-based, as tax
exemption and public benefit status were granted to a very limited number of civil society
organisations by the Council of Ministers, using unclear criteria. Public funds were allocated
to civil society organisations via ministries and through project partnership mechanisms, and
rarely through grant allocations or service contracts.
The EU-Turkey Civil Society Dialogue programmes continued, contributing to civil society
development and a greater recognition of civil society organisations at local level.
Overall, there is a growing rights-based civil society in Turkey insisting that the citizen is
prioritised in policymaking and administration and that the exercise of fundamental rights is
guaranteed by law. Government- and parliament-civil society relations should be improved
through systematic, permanent and structured consultation mechanisms at policy level,
notably as part of the legislative process. The legal, financial and administrative environment
for civil society needs to better support an open society, encouraging active citizenship.
Judicial system
The amendments to the Law on High Council of Judges and Prosecutors and the subsequent
dismissal of staff and numerous reassignments of judges and prosecutors raised serious
concerns over the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and the separation of
powers. The Turkish Constitutional Court found a number of provisions unconstitutional and
gave the legislature a deadline of three months to adopt revised legislation. Among these
provisions were those dismissing staff; however, the decision of the Court had no retroactive
effect. In June, parliament adopted legislation to implement the Constitutional Court’s
decision. This legislation brought back the legal provisions introduced in 2010, restoring thus
the role of the plenary which is a key guarantee of the independence of the judiciary.
The Constitutional Court continued to receive individual applications. The Court ruled on
number important cases, such as YouTube and Twitter bans, as well as Hrant Dink’s murder
case. These decisions showed the importance of the individual application procedure
introduced with the 2010 constitutional amendments. The court also overturned the number of
amendments to the Law on the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors. These decisions
highlighted the resilience of the Turkish constitutional system.
In February the specially authorised courts were abolished. By abrogating Article 10 of the
Anti-Terror Law in its entirety, the law suppressed, together with the Regional Serious
Crimes Courts, their special powers and reduced the maximum detention on remand from ten
to five years. These reforms were adopted without transitional provisions and risk resulting in
affecting the effectiveness of the courts that are already overburdened. The lower statutory
maximum limit of five years of detention on remand remains excessive if compared with
practice of EU Member States. The frequent changes to the justice system, with no proper
stakeholder consultation, risk further reducing the efficiency of the Turkish criminal system.
A Law on the National Intelligence Services, adopted in April, allows wiretappings and
surveillance to be conducted by Turkish intelligence services without judicial oversight,
which goes against European standards.
Concerns about criminal justice legislation and practice remained, in particular on the
capacity of prosecutors to lead investigations, poor implementation of cross-examination at
trial, the poor quality or lack of reasoning in indictments and the excessive use and duration of

                                               13
 pre-trial detention. The scope and quality of legal aid is inadequate and there is no effective
monitoring that would help remedy long-standing problems. There was no significant change
in the gender balance in the field, with women making up approximately a quarter of the
judiciary and being particularly underrepresented in prosecutorial and managerial positions.
For a detailed analysis of the developments in the judicial system, see Chapter 23 —
Judiciary and fundamental rights.
Fight against corruption
Corruption allegations played a significant part in the political debate in Turkey, particularly
following the anti-corruption investigations launched in December 2013. The handling of
these allegations of corruption raised serious concerns that allegations of wrongdoing would
not be addressed in a non-discriminatory, transparent and impartial manner. No concrete steps
were taken to address deficiencies in rules governing the financing of political parties and
election campaigns or the scope of immunity for MPs. Implementation of the 2010-14
national anti-corruption strategy and action plan continued but no information was given to
parliament or civil society on the resulting impact. Civil society organisations had very
limited opportunities to contribute. Turkey has to decide whether it will adopt an anti-
corruption strategy and action plan for the period after 2014. Greater political will and civil
society involvement are needed if results are to be achieved on the ground so as to establish a
track record of investigations, indictments and convictions.
For a detailed analysis of developments in the area of anti-corruption policy, see Chapter 23
— Judiciary and fundamental rights.
Fight against organised crime
Some progress was made in the fight against organised crime. Turkey improved its
programme to counter the financing of terrorism. The Turkish National Police has increased
the presence of the witness protection units to cover 77 provinces. Turkey ratified the Council
of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which it had signed in 2010. The newly established
General Directorate for Migration Management in the Ministry of Interior has taken over
responsibilities relating to trafficking in human beings from the Turkish National Police,
which will nonetheless continue to play an active role in the anti-trafficking operational
framework. The General Directorate will also take on the provision of financial support to
victims’ shelters in Istanbul, Antalya and Ankara and the functioning of the anti-trafficking
helpline 157.
For a detailed analysis of developments in the fight against organised crime, see Chapter 24
— Justice, freedom and security.
2.2.    Human rights and the protection of minorities
Turkey created a Turkish version of the database of European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) judgments, and translations of relevant ECtHR judgments are published on the
website of the Ministry of Justice. The adoption in March of the Action Plan for Prevention of
Violations of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) represents a significant
step towards aligning Turkey’s legal framework with ECtHR case-law. Turkey needs to
continue its efforts to implement all the judgments of the ECtHR. Work continued on human
rights mechanisms and institutions. The National Human Rights Institution (NHRI) was
assigned the role of the national preventive mechanism (NPM) under the Optional Protocol to
the United Nations Convention on Prevention of Torture. The NHRI/NPM’s autonomy needs
to be increased. A body has to be set up to promote equality and combat racism, xenophobia,
anti-Semitism and intolerance. Particular attention should also be paid to facilitating the work
of human rights defenders.


                                              14
 The government continued its work to ensure compliance with legal safeguards for the
prevention of torture and ill-treatment. The downward trend in the incidence and severity of
ill-treatment in official detention places continued. However, the frequent use of excessive
force during demonstrations and arrests remains a matter of concern. Turkey needs to adopt
clear and binding rules on the proportionate use of force in demonstrations, in line with the
relevant Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) recommendations
and ECtHR case-law. Parliament’s Human Rights Inquiry Committee started monitoring ill-
treatment during military service. Instances of ill-treatment of conscripts continued to be
reported. Law enforcement bodies continued to launch counter-cases against those alleging
torture or ill-treatment. In many instances, these counter-cases were given priority by the
courts. The absence of prompt, thorough, independent and effective investigations into all
allegations of torture by law enforcement officers remains a concern.
There was a positive trend in prison staff training. However, overcrowding and the human
rights situation in prisons remained matters of concern. Monitoring needs to be institutionally
strengthened. The situation of juvenile and sick prisoners needs urgent attention.
Positive steps were taken with the adoption of the Action Plan on Violations of the Human
Rights and a reduction in the length of pre-trial detention, following which many journalists
were released from custody. However, legislation further limiting freedom of expression,
including on the Internet, was adopted and the effective exercise of this freedom, and press
freedom, was restricted in practice. The blanket bans on YouTube and Twitter raised serious
concern, even if later annulled by the Constitutional Court. Intimidating statements by
politicians and cases launched against critical journalists, combined with the ownership
structure of the media sector, led to widespread self-censorship by media owners and
journalists, as well as sacking of journalists.
Turkish legislation and its implementation concerning the right to assembly and regarding
intervention by law enforcement officers are still to be brought in line with European
standards. The unlawfulness of a demonstration, rather than its non-peaceful nature, is the
basic criterion for the use of force to disperse participants, which is not in line with ECtHR
case-law. Improvements in the legal framework more strictly regulating the use of force need
to be complemented by appropriate training for law enforcement officers. Non-respect of the
June and July 2013 circulars from the Ministry of the Interior on the use of tear gas by the riot
police and on courses of action in cases of social unrest should be consistently and
immediately penalised.
Turkish legislation on the right to association still needs to be improved in order to be brought
in line with European standards. Legislative and administrative obstacles hindered the
financial sustainability of civil society organisations.
There is a need for comprehensive reform of legislation on freedom of thought, conscience
and religion and application of this legislation, in line with ECtHR rulings, Council of Europe
recommendations and EU standards. This relates also to issues regarding the indication of
religious affiliation on identity cards, conscientious objection, legal personality of religious
bodies and institutions, places of worship, and work and residence permits for clergy.
Progress on the issue of Cem house recognition would resolve many grievances.
Implementation of the Law on the Protection of Family and Prevention of Violence against
Women continued but required additional human resources and coordination. More
involvement and participation of women is needed in employment, policymaking and politics.
The government needs to take measures to address the issue of early and forced marriages.
A 2013-17 national child rights strategy was adopted in December 2013. It sets out the
general framework and actions for promoting services for children in numerous fields such as
justice, health, education, private protection services and media. Regional disparities

                                               15
 remained in access to education. Children with disabilities and special learning needs,
children of seasonal agricultural migrant families and Roma children faced particular
difficulties in accessing education. Child labour and child poverty continued to be issues of
concern.
Legislation adopted in February 2014 improved the situation of the socially vulnerable and
people with disabilities. The principle of non-discrimination on the basis of disability is now
explicitly mentioned in the national education law and the labour law. Further work is needed
to provide equal access to education opportunities, integrate people with disabilities and bring
practice in line with European standards. Further work is also needed to bring anti-
discrimination legislation and practice in line with EU acquis, in particular by including
reference to discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.
Legislation regarding trade union rights needs to be revised and an environment conducive to
the free exercise of these rights needs to be established. The right to organise, to enter into
collective bargaining and the right to strike for private sector employees and civil servants
have to be aligned with the acquis and international standards.
On property rights, the implementation of the 2008 Law on Foundations, revised in 2011,
continued. Under this legislation, 116 minority community foundations applied for the
restitution of a total of 1 560 properties. By April, the Foundations Council had approved the
return of 318 properties and the payment of compensation for 21 properties. 1 092
applications were found to be ineligible. Assessment of the remaining applications continued.
Dialogue continued between the government and representatives of minorities. There was no
change in the legal framework: Turkey considers Turkish citizens as individuals with equal
rights and only recognises non-Muslim communities as minorities, in line with its
interpretation of the Lausanne Treaty. However, in addition to providing full equality for all
citizens, this approach should not prevent Turkey from granting specific rights to citizens on
the basis of ethnic origin, religion or language, so that they can preserve their identity.
Sustained work is needed to prevent and punish hate speech or crimes targeting minorities or
people belonging to minorities.
Regarding cultural rights, there were positive developments regarding using mother tongues
and a steady and welcome normalisation of the use of Kurdish in public.
For a detailed analysis of the developments in the area of human rights and the protection of
minorities, see Chapter 23 — Judiciary and fundamental rights. For developments in the
areas of trade union rights, anti-discrimination and equal opportunities, see also Chapter 19
— Social policy and employment.
Situation in the east and south-east
The settlement process aiming at solving the Kurdish issue continued. Options for a solution
were widely and freely discussed. Measures adopted in March allowed for campaigning by
political parties and candidates in languages other than Turkish during local and
parliamentary elections, extended state funding to political parties that receive more than 3 %
of the vote, allowed for private education in children’s mother tongue, and lifted the criminal
punishment for the use of non-Turkish letters, addressing primarily problems stemming from
the use of Kurdish letters X, Q and W.
On 11 June, parliament adopted a law on eliminating terrorism and strengthening social
integration. Its aim is to provide a stronger legal basis for the settlement process. The law
grants legal protection to those involved in talks with the PKK, which is on the EU list of
terrorist organisations and facilitates the rehabilitation of PKK militants who give up arms.
Abdullah Öcalan and the pro-Kurdish BDP and HDP parties welcomed the law (see above 2.1
— Democracy and the rule of law).

                                              16
 A positive atmosphere prevailed in general, including for Newroz. There was continued state
engagement with the imprisoned PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan. The April revision of the law
on the National Intelligence Service provided legal guarantees for intelligence officials
conducting talks with Öcalan.
Sporadic violent incidents occurred, leading to some casualties, in particular in regions where
military security installations were constructed or strengthened. The PKK kidnapped several
persons throughout the year, including civil servants and soldiers. All kidnapped persons were
released after intervention from Kurdish MPs. The PKK withdrawal from Turkey slowed and
in January it was announced that it had stopped. Öcalan’s Newroz message did nevertheless
express hope for the process. The government-initiated committee of wise persons finalised
its reports, containing recommendations for the settlement process. These were not published.
After the abolition of Article 10 of the Anti-Terror Law and the reduction of the maximum
pre-trial detention period to five years, most defendants accused in cases relating to the
Kurdish issue, including the KCK case, were released. Some remained in prison if they had
been convicted on other charges, including under Article 314 of the Turkish Criminal Code on
armed organisations.
The clearance of anti-personnel landmines continued. Turkey requested that the 2014 deadline
to dispose of all anti-personnel landmines, whose number is estimated at around a million, be
extended until 2022. The clearance of mines along the border with Syria stopped in the
second half of 2013. Turkey became a party to the ‘Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction’
(Ottawa Convention) in 2003; however it was able to obtain an extension of the deadline until
2022 in order to fulfil its obligation.
The South-East Anatolia Project to improve the socioeconomic development of the region
continued, with notable improvements in infrastructure. Dam projects were criticised for
destroying or threatening historical heritage, natural habitats and agricultural land.
No steps were taken to abolish the village guard system, a paramilitary force of 46 739 people,
paid and armed by the state.
In November 2013 the ECtHR decided (Benzer and Others v. Turkey) that Turkey had
violated Article 2 (on right to life, inadequate investigation) and Article 3 (prohibition of
inhuman or degrading treatment) of the European Convention on Human Rights in a 1994
incident that included the bombing of civilians by the military in two villages in Şırnak.
In January, the General Staff Military Prosecutor’s Office announced a decision not to
prosecute in the case of the 2011 killing of 34 civilians by the military at Uludere/Roboski, on
the grounds that the officers involved in the air operation were not at fault. The victims’
families have launched an individual application with the Constitutional Court.
The statute of limitations for cases of missing persons and extrajudicial killings dating from
the 1990s remained in force. Several cases were dropped as a result. Twelve court cases were
ongoing regarding past crimes, all of which were transferred to western provinces for security
reasons. There is an urgent need for effective investigation into these killings, involving
forensic scientists, lawyers, victims’ families, human rights organisations, academics, and
international cooperation mechanisms.
Overall, the settlement process continued, despite sporadic tensions in the southeast. The law
on eliminating terrorism and strengthening social integration provides a stronger legal
foundation for the settlement talks. Legislative changes are needed to eliminate the lack of
accountability and the statute of limitations in cases of killings from the 1990s, as well as
those perpetrated in recent years.


                                              17
 Refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
The entry into force of the Law on Foreigners and International Protection and related
implementing legislation represented significant progress in the area of migration, as it
introduced a comprehensive legal and institutional framework on migration and asylum with a
view to bringing Turkey in line with EU and international standards. (See also Chapter 24 —
Justice, freedom and security)
Detailed provisions on managing removal and reception centres are needed, and structured
psycho-social services are necessary for the migrants accommodated in such facilities.
Turkey maintained an open border policy and granted temporary protection to more than 1
million Syrian refugees. Some 220 000 Syrians were hosted in temporary protection facilities
set up in 22 provinces. The registration of non-camp refugees continued. As of June 2014,
approximately 580 000 non-camp Syrian refugees had been registered. A further 140 000
Syrians fled ISIS into Turkey in September.
In addition to Syrian refugees, Turkey hosted asylum-seekers and refugees, including
children, from other countries. The non-Syrian asylum applicants amounted to more than
80 000 individuals. Some children received social assistance and healthcare and were able to
attend school; others faced difficulties due to poverty, language skills or issues relating to
identity documents and compulsory places of residence.
In April, Turkey returned Azeri dissident journalist Rauf Mirgadirov to Azerbaijan without
allowing him access to a lawyer or basic due process protection. Azerbaijan detained
Mirgadirov upon his arrival at Baku International Airport.
There was no comprehensive national strategy in place to address the situation of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) or those who wished to return to their homes. IDPs were not always
allowed to return to their point of origin as some villages remain defined as security zones.
Some IDPs returned to their villages for only limited periods, given the absence of basic
infrastructure. Most IDPs were registered and took part in local elections. However, they
often did not have access to basic services. The process of compensating IDPs continued.
Overall, there was significant progress on the legislative framework on refugees and asylum-
seekers, with the entry into force of the Law on Foreigners and International Protection and
related implementing legislation, which Turkey needs to complete further. A comprehensive
national strategy to address the requirements of IDPs is needed to uphold their rights and
encourage return.
2.3.     Regional issues and international obligations
Cyprus
Turkey supported the resumption of the fully-fledged settlement talks between the leaders of
both communities under the good offices of the UN Secretary-General. Turkey granted the
Committee on Missing Persons access to one further fenced military zone in the northern part
of Cyprus. The process of granting the Committee full access to all relevant archives and
military areas needs to be expedited. Turkey and Greece promoted reciprocal visits by the two
Chief Negotiators to Ankara and Athens in the context of the ongoing negotiations.
However, Turkey issued statements and engaged in actions challenging the Republic of
Cyprus’ right to exploit hydrocarbon resources in Cyprus’ Exclusive Economic Zone for the
benefit of all Cypriots. The EU stressed the sovereign rights of EU Member States which
include entering into bilateral agreements, and exploring and exploiting their natural resources
in accordance with the EU acquis and international law, including the UN Convention on the
Law of the Sea. The EU also stressed the need to respect the sovereignty of Member States
over their territorial sea.

                                              18
 As emphasised in the Negotiating Framework and Council Declarations, Turkey is expected
to actively support the negotiations towards a fair, comprehensive and viable settlement of the
Cyprus issue within the UN framework, in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council
resolutions and in line with the principles on which the EU is founded. Turkey’s commitment
in concrete terms to such a comprehensive settlement remains crucial. Statements that are not
conducive to creating a positive atmosphere in the context of the ongoing settlement talks
should be avoided.
Despite repeated calls by the Council and the Commission, Turkey has still not complied with
its obligations as outlined in the declaration of the European Community and its Member
States of 21 September 2005 and in Council conclusions, including those of December 2006
and December 2013.
Turkey has not fulfilled its obligation to ensure full and non-discriminatory implementation of
the Additional Protocol to the Association Agreement and has not removed all obstacles to the
free movement of goods, including restrictions on direct transport links with Cyprus. There
was no progress on normalising bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus.
Turkey has not lifted its veto of Cyprus’ membership of several international organisations,
such as the OECD.
Peaceful settlement of border disputes
Turkey and Greece continued their exploratory talks to find common ground for the start of
negotiations on the delimitation of the continental shelf, holding the 58th meeting since 2002
in September 2014.
Greece continued to object to Turkey’s launch of a tender for offshore oil and gas exploration
including part of the continental shelf off the Greek island of Castellorizo.
The threat of casus belli in response to the possible extension of Greek territorial waters, as
made in a Turkish Grand National Assembly resolution in 1995, still stands. In line with the
Negotiating Framework and previous European Council and Council conclusions, the Council
has reiterated that ‘Turkey needs to commit itself unequivocally to good neighbourly relations
and to the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the United Nations Charter,
having recourse, if necessary, to the International Court of Justice. In this context, the Union
expressed once again serious concern, and urges Turkey to avoid any kind of threat or action
directed against a Member State, or source of friction or actions, which could damage good
neighbourly relations and the peaceful settlement of disputes.’ Greece and Cyprus made
formal complaints about repeated and increased violations of their territorial waters and
airspace by Turkey, including flights over Greek islands.
Regional cooperation
Relations with other enlargement countries and neighbouring EU Member States have been
positive. Turkey has continued its policy of engagement in the Western Balkans. Under the
common security and defence policy, Turkey is continuing to contribute to the EU-led
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR ALTHEA) and to the EULEX mission
in Kosovo.∗ Turkey supports Kosovo’s integration into the international community,
European institutions and regional initiatives. Turkey maintained strong ties with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and supported their
respective efforts towards joining NATO and the EU.




∗
       This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244/99 and the
       ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence.

                                                    19
 3.      ECONOMIC CRITERIA
In examining economic developments in Turkey, the Commission’s approach was guided by
the conclusions of the Copenhagen European Council in June 1993, which stated that
membership of the Union requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the
capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union.
Monitoring of the economic criteria needs to be seen in the context of the increased role for
economic governance in the enlargement process, as welcomed by the General Affairs
Council of 17 December 2013. To this end, in May, the Economic and Financial Affairs
Council adopted targeted policy guidance for Turkey based on its pre-accession economic
programme.
3.1.    The existence of a functioning market economy
Turkey’s solid growth performance since 2001 confirms the economy’s improved
fundamentals and increased resilience to shocks. However, the large structural current account
deficit and relatively high inflation indicate the persistence of significant underlying
imbalances in the economy. The functioning of market mechanisms has remained appropriate,
but Turkey needs to reduce macroeconomic imbalances and take steps to realise its long-term
growth potential.
Economic policy essentials
The pre-accession economic programme for 2014-16, submitted to the Commission in
February 2013, is based on assumptions of relatively moderate growth, declining inflation,
and a reduction of the fiscal and current account deficits. However, even in this optimistic
scenario, the external deficit remains large, making Turkey vulnerable to capital flow
reversals, either in the context of increasing global risk aversion regarding emerging market
assets, or as a result of a rise in perceived country-specific risks. The fragmentation of
responsibilities between government bodies continues to complicate the coordination of
budgeting and medium-term economic policymaking. It seems that economic policymaking
has recently been affected by internal political tensions. Overall, the consensus on economic
policy essentials has apparently weakened. Turkey needs to take steps to reduce the
macroeconomic imbalances and to realise its long-term growth potential.
Macroeconomic stability
Following a slowdown in 2012, the Turkish economy accelerated to 4.0 % annual growth in
Figure 1: Real GDP growth and unemployment     2013 which is somewhat below the long-
                                               term average since 2001. Consumer
                                               spending was the main driver for the
                                               upwards trend, while private capital
                                               spending     remained     subdued.      Public
                                               expenditure, particularly investment, was a
                                               significant support for GDP growth. Net
                                               exports, on the other hand, exerted a drag on
                                               GDP growth in 2013 as exports of goods and
                                               services, corresponding to 25.7 % of GDP,
                                               stagnated and imports surged. In the first half
                                               of 2014, GDP growth weakened to 3.3 %
                                               year-on-year as private domestic demand
                                               decelerated in light of tighter financial
                                               conditions, macro-prudential measures to
                                               rein in household borrowing, and some
indirect tax increases. The slowdown in private domestic demand was offset by rebounding
exports which benefited from a more competitive exchange rate and some recovery in export

                                             20
 markets, while imports declined slightly. GDP per capita based on purchasing power parity
amounted to 55 % of the EU average in 2013. Overall, economic growth has been relatively
moderate over the past year, with recent growth based on improving net exports.
Turkey’s current account deficit has remained very high by all standards, averaging 7 % of
                                                  GDP over the past two years. The deficit
Figure 2: External position
                                                  widened to 7.9 % of GDP in 2013, but this
                                                  increase was due to volatility in Turkey’s
                                                  external trade in gold and is largely unrelated
                                                  to the economy’s underlying international
                                                  competitiveness.      Helped       by     some
                                                  normalisation in the gold trade, the current
                                                  account deficit narrowed in the first half of
                                                  2014, lowering the 12-month rolling deficit
                                                  to 6.6 % of GDP in June. The persistently
                                                  large current account deficit leaves the
                                                  Turkish currency vulnerable to a sudden loss
                                                  of investor confidence, as seen in the period
                                                  between May 2013 and January 2014, when
                                                  capital outflows temporarily lowered the
                                                  value of the Turkish lira by up to 25 %
against the euro. Only a relatively small proportion (14.7 %) of the current account deficit was
financed with net inflows of foreign direct investment in 2013. Net portfolio investments
covered twice as much (28.3 %) of the deficit and most of the remainder (47.0 %) was met by
banks’ foreign borrowing. While gross external debt amounted to a still manageable 53 %, its
increase by about 15 % in the course of 2013 was comparatively high. Overall, the external
deficit has remained very high and its short-term financing makes the country vulnerable
to sudden changes in global investor sentiment.
The labour market performance was mixed in 2013. For the population aged 20-64, the annual
unemployment rate went up by 0.6 percentage points to 8.8 %, because the size of the labour
force increased more than the opportunities for employment. Labour force growth (3.5 %) was
mainly driven by demographics, but also by a 1 percentage point rise in the labour force
participation rate to 58.4 %. The annual employment rate rose slightly to 53.4 %. In the first
five months of 2014, labour force growth continued to outpace employment growth, leaving
the unemployment rate half a percentage point higher year-on-year on average. The female
employment rate remained very low, at 31.8 % in 2013, although it was up by 1.1 percentage
points compared to the preceding year. Despite the low proportion of the female population
actively looking for work, the female unemployment rate is higher than the male
unemployment rate. In addition, about one third of women who are considered to be
employed are unpaid family workers in the agricultural sector. The high proportion (25.5 %)
of young people not in employment, education or training remains a concern. The efficient
functioning of the labour market continues to be impeded by a lack of flexibility, for example
on labour contracts, and undeclared work remains a widespread practice. This calls for a
deepening and widening of labour market reforms which needs to be more inclusive, too.
Overall, employment has increased at a rate commensurate to output but this has been
insufficient to fully absorb the increase in the labour force. The female employment rate
has edged higher, but remains at a very low level.
The central bank has continued to conduct monetary policy within an unconventional
framework. Although price stability is the primary objective, the central bank is also pursuing
macro-financial stability, attaching a reference value of 15 % to credit growth, and dampening
exchange rate fluctuations. Between May 2013 and January 2014, Turkey’s financial markets
and the lira were under severe downward pressure as a result of changing international

                                               21
 monetary conditions, domestic political tensions and regional turmoil. In this period, the lira
depreciated by 15.1 % in real effective terms. Fuelled by the depreciating currency,
accelerating food prices, and some indirect tax increases, consumer price inflation increased
from 6.2 % year-on-year at the end of 2012 to 7.4 % in December 2013, i.e. clearly above the
central bank’s target of 5 % and outside the tolerance band of +/- 2 percentage points around
the target. Foreign-exchange adjusted credit growth had increased to 25 % by the end of 2013.
In mid-2013, the central bank started to move to a less accommodative policy stance and
supported the lira by selling foreign exchange reserves. When downward market pressures
intensified in December-January, monetary policy was tightened more decisively. Following
an extraordinary meeting of its monetary policy committee on 28 January 2014, the central
bank raised the overnight lending rate and the one-week repo rate to 12 % and 10 %,
respectively, and announced that the tight policy stance would be sustained until the inflation
outlook had improved significantly. As part of these decisions, the complex monetary policy
framework was simplified somewhat. Subsequently, the downward pressures in Turkey’s
financial markets subsided and the lira appreciated by 7.4 % in real effective terms between
January and August. Credit growth declined to below 20 % year-on-year, helped by macro-
prudential measures introduced in October 2013 to rein in consumer borrowing. The inflation
performance, however, deteriorated further with headline inflation fluctuating in the 9-10 %
range between April and August, core goods inflation running above 10 %, and inflation
expectations trending upwards. Nevertheless, the central bank again reversed the course of its
monetary policy by lowering the one-week repo rate to 8.25 % in three steps between May
and July and the overnight lending rate to 11.25 % in August. Overall, inflation has increased
noticeably and is now diverging significantly from the central bank’s target. The central
bank has continued to pursue multiple objectives within an unconventional and complex
monetary policy framework that hampers transparency and predictability. A clear focus on
the primary objective of price stability is required to attain the central bank’s inflation
target.
Regarding public finances, transparency continues to suffer from the lack of timely
information in accordance with international standards on the fiscal account for general
                                                    government. As far as central government is
 Figure 3: Fiscal developments
                                                    concerned, the 2013 budget deficit was
                                                    lower than originally planned. The original
                                                    unambitious deficit target of 2.2 % of GDP
                                                    was revised to 1.2 % last October which is
                                                    estimated to have been met. Revenues
                                                    increased by a higher-than-planned 17.1 %
                                                    year-on-year, mainly as a result of changes
                                                    in indirect taxation and social security
                                                    premiums, privatisation and dividend
                                                    receipts, and one-off factors like the
                                                    payment of VAT arrears by state-owned
                                                    enterprises. Expenditure increased by
                                                    12.7 % compared to 2012, clearly above
nominal GDP growth (10.2 %) and with some significant budgetary overruns, not least on
capital spending. In the first half of 2014, expenditure increased faster than revenue on a year-
on-year basis, but the central government’s 12-month rolling budget deficit stabilised around
1.5 % of GDP. General government debt increased by 10.6 % in absolute terms in 2013, partly
because the depreciation of the Turkish lira increased the value of the foreign currency debt in
domestic currency terms. Consequently, the downwards trend in the debt-to-GDP ratio came
to a halt in 2013 and the ratio edged up by 0.1 percentage point to 36.3 % over the year.
Overall, fiscal performance benefited from a temporary surge in revenues, but continued to
show budgetary overruns on the expenditure side. The sustainability of public debt was

                                               22
 maintained. There was no progress on increasing the transparency of the fiscal framework.
Adopting a fiscal rule would provide a significant fiscal anchor, increase credibility and
support the envisaged reduction of the structural fiscal deficit.
The ongoing dependence on capital inflows is a macroeconomic vulnerability which makes
Turkey prone to boom-bust cycles. The tightening of monetary policy in early 2014 helped to
halt the lira’s depreciation trend and to reduce the year-on-year credit growth rate (adjusted
for exchange rate effects) from 25 % to 21.5 % over the course of the first quarter. In view of
the continued overshooting of the inflation target and the chronically low private saving rate,
monetary policy should remain tight. Furthermore, fiscal policy should help to increase
domestic saving by pursuing a sufficiently restrictive course. Overall, the Turkish economy
remains vulnerable to bouts of financial uncertainty and changes in global risk sentiment
and there is scope for adjusting monetary and fiscal policy to lower the macroeconomic
imbalances.
Interplay of market forces
The proportion of directly administered prices in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) basket has
remained below 5 %. However, food and alcohol prices, which together make up more than
25 % of the consumer basket, are highly sensitive to policy and administrative decisions. For
energy (natural gas and electricity), automatic pricing mechanisms are applied in principle
which link end-user prices to a cost-based methodology. In practice, however, the government
continues to set end-user prices, thereby effectively suspending the automatic pricing
mechanisms. There has been no progress in eliminating the cross-subsidisation between
consumers in the wholesale and retail electricity markets. The private sector proportion of
GDP has remained stable at 86.5 %. Privatisation activity, particularly in the electricity sector,
was stepped up, with the total volume of completed deals increasing from € 2.3 billion (0.4 %
of GDP) in 2012 to € 9.2 billion (1.5 % of GDP) in 2013. Privatisation tenders continued in
early 2014, particularly in the energy sector. Overall, privatisation has accelerated, but there
has been no progress on price liberalisation as the government continues to interfere in the
price-setting mechanism in key sectors. Competition could be increased by continued
liberalisation of product and services markets.
Market entry and exit
The number of newly established businesses increased by 1.6 % in 2013 compared with the
previous year. Starting a business in Turkey still requires six separate procedures and takes six
days on average. The average cost of starting a business has increased to 12.7 % of per capita
income from 10.5 % in the preceding year. Obtaining a construction permit is still very
cumbersome and time-consuming. The number of businesses closing down or being
liquidated fell by 20.6 % compared with 2012. Closing a business remains expensive and
time-consuming. Insolvency procedures last an average of 3.3 years and recovery rates — at
22.3 % on average — remain very low and are falling. Overall, starting a business has
become somewhat more expensive and market entry conditions could generally be
improved. Market exit remains costly and long, and insolvency proceedings are still heavy
and inefficient.
Legal system
A reasonably well-functioning legal system has been in place in the area of property rights for
several years. Enforcement of commercial contracts is still a rather lengthy process, partly
because commercial court judges are insufficiently specialised. The expert witness system
still operates as a parallel judicial system, but does not improve overall quality. Out-of-court
dispute settlement mechanisms are seldom used, except in the insurance sector, tax and
customs. The judicial system and its administrative capacity could be further improved. A
proposal for a new amnesty on interest payments related to tax arrears has been submitted to

                                               23
 parliament. The recurrent introduction of such amnesties and restructuring mechanisms
discriminates against regular payment and harms the tax and social security administrations’
collection capacity in the long term. Taxpayers or other citizens subject to fines have a clear
advantage in delaying their payments, especially in the current inflationary environment.
Overall, the legal system continues to function relatively well in the area of property rights,
but in general no progress has been observed.
Financial sector development
Banks have continued to dominate the financial sector, with their share of the sector’s total
assets remaining stable (87.4 % in June 2013). The relatively small insurance sector’s share
(including private pensions) remained unchanged at 4.6 %. The value of banking sector assets
increased from 97 % of GDP in 2012 to 111 % in 2013. State-owned banks’ share of total
banking sector assets remained roughly stable, at close to 28 % in 2013. The state’s share in
Halkbank, the country’s seventh-largest bank by assets, has remained at 51.1 % in 2013 in the
absence of a strategy for its further privatisation. Foreign banks’ share increased from 12.7 %
in 2012 to 13.9 % in 2013.
Following the switch to a more accommodative monetary policy stance in 2012, banks’
foreign-exchange adjusted loan portfolio accelerated in 2013 and reached 25 % at the end of
the year. Macro-prudential measures in October 2013 and the tightening of monetary policy in
January 2014 have gradually lowered credit growth in the first eight months of 2014. The
banks’ loan-to-deposit ratio increased further and reached 109 % by the end of 2013.
The banking sector has maintained an adequate profitability performance. Net profit increased
by 5.1 % in 2013, but was 12.4 % lower year-on-year in the first seven months of 2014. The
sector’s capital adequacy ratio increased to 16.3 % in May 2014 which is significantly above
the regulatory target of 12 %. Basel II standards have been implemented in capital adequacy
calculations since July 2012 and the necessary legislation for the implementation of Basel III
was mostly completed in 2013. The proportion of non-performing loans in total banking
sector loans has remained broadly stable at just below 3 %. Overall, the financial sector has
performed well and has continued to demonstrate resilience.
3.2.    The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the
        Union
Human and physical capital
According to the OECD’s regular assessment of educational performance for 15-year-old
students (PISA), the mean score of Turkish students improved in the three categories of
science (9 points), mathematics (3 points) and reading (11 points) between 2009 and 2012.
The average improvement of 8 points was, however, below the 23 point improvement seen
between 2006 and 2009 and Turkey remains 48 points below the OECD average. Schooling
ratios have increased at all levels of education between 2011/12 and 2012/13 reaching 99 %
for the first four years and 93 % for the second four years of primary school and 70 % for
secondary school. However, sizeable gaps persist regarding the schooling ratios for girls,
especially in secondary school. Participation in higher education remains low by international
standards, although the percentage of the population aged 30-34 with tertiary education
qualifications increased from 18 % in 2012 to 19.5 % in 2013. Overall, reforms and increased
spending on education have so far generated a positive impact on educational attainment
and schooling rates, but significant problems remain with regard to gender equality and the
quality of education. Deepening and widening of labour market reforms would help to
upgrade and make better use of Turkey’s human capital.
Total investment remained unchanged at 20.3 % of GDP between 2012 and 2013, but there
was a shift from private to public investment. While private investment continued to decline
as a proportion of GDP (from 16.4 % to 15.6 %), public investment continued to increase

                                              24
 (from 3.9 % to 4.7 %). Gross foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows to Turkey decreased
from 1.7 % of GDP to 1.6 % of GDP and the FDI stock as a proportion of GDP fell from
23.6 % to 19.9 % over the year. R&D expenditure (both public and private) edged higher from
0.86 % of GDP (2011) to 0.92 % (2012), far below the government’s current target of 1.8 % by
2018. Little progress was made in upgrading the transport infrastructure in 2012: the length of
the railway network remained unchanged, the motorway network was only extended slightly,
and the total length of other roads increased by 4.2 %. Overall, improvements in the
country’s physical capital have been modest.
Sectoral and enterprise structure
In 2013, GDP growth of 4 % was achieved with 2.8 % employment growth, indicating rising
labour productivity in the overall economy. The sectoral breakdown of employment growth
shows a continued shift towards the services sector whose share of total employment went up
by 0.7 percentage points to 50.9 %. Industry gained 0.2 percentage points to 20.7 %,
construction remained unchanged at 7.2 %, while agriculture lost 0.9 percentage points to
21.2 %. In terms of proportion of GDP, agriculture declined by 0.5 percentage points to 7.2 %.
There has been continued progress in the liberalisation of the network industries. Following
the entering into force of a new electricity market law in March 2013, an estimated 85 % of
the market has been opened for competition with the aim of achieving 100 % by 2015. The
transfer of distribution assets to private companies was completed, but progress in the
privatisation of electricity-generating assets remained limited due to difficulties for potential
investors in securing necessary financing. Further progress is needed to liberalise the natural
gas market by reducing the monopolistic market share of state-owned BOTAŞ. A draft law to
amend the Natural Gas Market Law has yet to be adopted by parliament. A transparent and
cost-based pricing mechanism for electricity and gas remains to be properly implemented.
Overall, the liberalisation of the electricity market made significant advances, but there was
little progress in other network industries.
State influence on competitiveness
Legislation to implement the State Aid Law, originally scheduled to be enacted by September
2011, has been postponed until the end of 2014. The State Aid Authority has still not formally
set up a comprehensive state aid inventory or adopted an action plan to align all state aid
schemes, including the 2012 incentives package, with the acquis. Amendments to the legal
framework for public procurement (see Chapter 5 — Public procurement) brought this further
out of line with the EU acquis. Overall, there has been no progress in improving the
transparency of state aid and there has been some backsliding in public procurement.
Economic integration with the EU
The openness of the economy, as measured by the value of exports and imports of goods and
services as a percentage of GDP, increased between 2012 and 2013 from 57.8 % to 58.0 %.
The proportion of trade with the EU out of Turkey’s total trade increased from 37.8 % to
38.5 %. The EU proportion of Turkey’s exports increased from 39.0 % to 41.5 %, while its
proportion of Turkey’s imports decreased slightly from 37.1 % to 36.7 %. The EU remained
the largest source of FDI flows into Turkey although its proportion declined from 67.9 % of
the total to 51.8 %. The Turkish lira depreciated by 5.0 % in CPI-based real effective terms
between June 2013 and June 2014, which has improved Turkey’s international price
competitiveness. Overall, trade and economic integration with the EU has remained high
and Turkey has gained international price competitiveness from currency depreciation.

4.       ABILITY TO TAKE ON THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP
This section examines Turkey’s ability to take on the obligations of membership — that is,
the acquis as expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation and the policies of the
                                               25
 Union. It also analyses the country’s administrative capacity to implement the acquis. The
analysis is structured according to the list of 33 acquis chapters. In each sector, the
Commission’s assessment covers the progress achieved during the reporting period, and
summarises the country’s overall level of preparation.
4.1.     Chapter 1: Free movement of goods
Regarding the general principles applicable to the free movement of goods, the Ministry of
Economy continued its implementation of a risk-based electronic import control system,
‘TAREKS’, enabling the free circulation of products. TAREKS mainly covers products in the
‘New Approach’ area, the non-harmonised area and some other limited categories such as
batteries and shoes. Second-hand and renovated goods have been processed through TAREKS
for the first time, while maintaining licensing procedures. Products in the ‘Old Approach’
area, particularly textiles, chemicals and foodstuffs, are subject to prior approval and
licensing, while EU type approvals are accepted in the area of motor vehicles.
The mutual recognition principle, introduced in Turkey for the non-harmonised area in 2012,
is operational. In addition, in July 2014 Turkey introduced mutual recognition articles on its
legislation regarding agricultural and forestry tractors and the manufacturing, renovation and
assembly of vehicles.
There are technical barriers to trade that prevent the free circulation of goods in areas such as
textiles, second-hand goods and alcoholic beverages. Registration requirements for importing
textiles and clothing remain in effect. The surveillance regime for imports is still in place and
its scope has been enlarged. Licences are still required for old goods, including second-hand
ones, and for those considered renovated or faulty. Although the licensing requirements for
alcoholic beverages have been reduced, new barriers concerning labelling have been
introduced. Exports of aluminium, paper and copper scrap are subject to restrictions which
constitute a de facto ban, contrary to customs union provisions.
Alignment of horizontal measures is advanced. Full alignment with the General Product
Safety Directive, to be replaced by the new Consumer Product Safety Regulation, has not yet
been achieved.
In the area of standardisation, the Turkish Standards Institute has to date adopted 22 266
standards set by the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and the European
Committee for Electro-technical Standardisation (CENELEC) and 391 standards set by the
European Telecommunication Standards Institute (ETSI). The overall rate of harmonisation
with European standards stands at 98.6 %. Turkey, however, has continued to adopt new
mandatory specifications and replace existing ones, mostly in the non-harmonised area.
In terms of conformity assessment, there are currently 32 Turkish notified bodies. The number
of accreditations provided by the Turkish Accreditation Agency increased by 18 % since last
year, reaching 954.
The National Metrology Institute of Turkey maintains an advanced level of scientific
metrology. The institute has upgraded its skills in chemical metrology. There are a sufficient
number of industrial metrology providers in the country. As regards legal metrology, Turkey
adopted two pieces of legislation on the inspection of taximeters and weighing instruments.
Turkey amended its market surveillance regulation in February, further clarifying the scope of
surveillance activities and obligations for manufacturers and distributors. New legislation was
issued on market surveillance for personal protective equipment, various consumer goods,
agricultural and forestry tractors and fertilisers. The national market surveillance database
from the Ministry of Economy is operational, allowing for information on non-compliant
products to be exchanged among market surveillance authorities and authorities in charge of
border controls. Effective implementation of market surveillance is yet to be achieved.

                                               26
 As regards ‘Old Approach’ product legislation, new and amending legislation was adopted
on motor vehicles and agricultural and forestry tractors. Turkey issued an amending
regulation on biocidal products and updated its legislation relating to their use. A new
regulation was issued on fertilisers for organic agriculture. Turkey issued legislation on the
classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures. New legislation was
transposed concerning the energy labelling of air conditioners.
In the already advanced area of ‘New and Global Approach’ product legislation, Turkey
adopted legislation on toy safety aiming to transpose the latest acquis.
As regards procedural measures, steps were taken to increase notifications of technical
legislation under the Directive 98/34/EC, although there is still a large shortfall in
notifications. There has been no progress on cultural goods and firearms.
Conclusion
There was some progress in this chapter. However, some technical barriers to trade continue
to prevent the free movement of goods, in violation of Turkey’s obligations under the customs
union. Free movement of goods in the ‘Old Approach’ area needs to be improved to exploit
the full potential of the customs union. Overall, alignment in this chapter is advanced.
4.2.     Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers
There were no major developments in the area of freedom of movement of workers. So far,
Turkey has concluded 13 bilateral social security agreements with EU Member States.
Conclusion
There has been no progress in the area of freedom of movement for workers. Turkey is
encouraged to conclude bilateral social security agreements. Overall, preparations in this area
are at an early stage.
4.3.     Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services
As regards the right of establishment and the freedom to provide cross-border services,
many requirements still restrict the right of establishment. Registration, licensing and
authorisation requirements continue to be in place for service providers registered in the EU.
Turkey still needs to align with the Services Directive and to set up a ‘Point of Single
Contact’. The Foreigners and International Protection Law came into force in April 2014,
eliminating the residence permit requirement for people with a valid work permit (or a permit
exemption certificate). Alignment in this area, and in that of the mutual recognition of
professional qualifications, will be facilitated by an EU-funded project, which will
particularly help Turkey producing a long-term alignment strategy.
In the area of postal services, the regulator adopted key implementing legislation concerning
issues such as authorisation, administrative sanctions, tariffs and quality of service. Further
clarification is needed on certain issues, such as the categories of operators required to obtain
a license and pay a universal service fee, and the extent of price regulation. Implementing
legislation on cost accounting requirements has not yet been adopted. The priority is now to
minimise discrepancies with the relevant acquis.
The mutual recognition of professional qualifications and academic qualifications require
differentiation. Some regulated professions are still subject to reciprocal recognition, and
nationality and language requirements remain. On the positive side, Turkey liberalised access
to the profession of midwife by repealing the nationality requirement. The Vocational
Qualifications Authority continued to issue occupational standards.




                                               27
 Conclusion
Overall, some progress was made in this chapter. Work needs to continue on the alignment
strategy with regard to the right of establishment and the freedom to provide services. Overall,
alignment remains at an early stage.
4.4.     Chapter 4: Free movement of capital
In the area of capital movements and payments, Turkey’s legislative framework on the
acquisition of real estate by foreigners remains yet to be aligned with Article 63 of the Treaty
on the Functioning of the European Union. The legal framework is not transparent, since the
list of countries whose citizens are allowed to purchase real estate is not public. This list is
based on a subjective assessment of ‘national interests and bilateral relations’ with the
respective country. Additional restrictions apply to Greek, Bulgarian and Cypriot citizens.
Turkey needs to adopt and implement an action plan for the gradual liberalisation of the
acquisition of real estate by foreigners, in line with the acquis. Sectoral restrictions apply to
foreign ownership in radio and TV broadcasting, transport, education and in the privatisation
of electricity distribution and generation assets.
As regards payment systems, the banking regulator adopted the implementing regulation
laying down the rules for the establishment and operation of electronic money institutions and
payment service providers, with the aim to increase alignment with the Payment Services,
Electronic Money and Settlement Finality Directives.
As regards the fight against money laundering and terrorism financing, Turkey has made
significant progress towards improving its regime of countering the financing of terrorism. In
its plenary meeting in June the Financial Action Task Force recognised that Turkey has
largely addressed its previously identified deficiencies including by appropriately
criminalising terrorist financing and establishing procedures to identify, freeze and confiscate
terrorist assets. As a result, the task force removed Turkey from the list of jurisdictions with
strategic deficiencies in fighting money laundering and terrorism financing, and added it to
the list of countries classed as ‘improving global anti-money laundering/countering the
financing of terrorism compliance: ongoing process’. The task force will conduct an on-site
visit to confirm that the process of implementing the required reforms is underway.
The number of suspicious transaction reports notified to the Turkish Financial Crimes
Investigation Board in 2013 was 25.592, compared with 15.318 notified in 2012; they
originated mostly from the banking sector. The number of suspicious transaction reports
regarding the financing of terrorism increased from 332 to 459. Results concerning
convictions, confiscations, seizures and the freezing of assets remain limited. Turkey has not
yet ratified the Council of Europe’s Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and
Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism (CETS 198),
which was signed in 2007.
Conclusion
There was some progress in the area of free movement of capital. Arrangements for real estate
acquisition remain non-transparent, not aligned with the acquis and restrictive of the rights of
a number of Member State nationals. The implementing regulation on electronic money
institutions and service providers is a welcome development, whose alignment with the
acquis needs to be further assessed. The legal framework to counter the financing of terrorism
has significantly improved although a thorough monitoring of implementation is required.
Overall, preparations in this area are moderately advanced.
4.5.     Chapter 5: Public procurement
With regard to general principles, the February 2014 ‘omnibus’ law amended various
aspects of Turkish public procurement legislation and introduced restrictive measures that

                                               28
 make the previously optional domestic price advantage of up to 15 % compulsory for
‘medium and high-technology industrial products’. In 2013, a domestic price advantage was
applied for 38 % of the overall contract value (41 % in 2012) and in 10 % (11 % in 2012) of
the number of contracts above the minimum threshold. The law amendment also introduced
an offset option in public tenders and exempted acquisitions involving offsets from the Public
Procurement Law. Offsets, which allow authorities to demand compensating measures if
goods are not produced domestically, contradict the EU acquis. The national strategy and
action plan for public procurement remain to be adopted.
Concerning the award of public contracts, the Public Procurement Authority has continued
to improve the electronic public procurement platform, which covers public procurement
processes and e-procurement, such as notification, tendering, selection and evaluation. The
Turkish Standards Institute has accredited the platform as compliant with data security
standards.
The Ministry of Finance, the Public Procurement Authority and the Ministry of Development
have sufficient operational capacity. Market functionality and competition in the majority of
sectors are satisfactory. The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the coordination of policy
formulation and implementation. However, sectoral laws drafted by various ministries, and
the recent ‘omnibus’ law in particular, challenge this structure. The ‘omnibus’ law authorises
the Ministry of Science, Industry and Technology to determine the list of items for which a
domestic price advantage will be compulsory.
Turkey’s public procurement legislation remains not in line with the acquis in a number of
aspects. This includes numerous derogations and exemptions from the scope of the law. Both
the classical and utilities sectors are formally subject to the same law and procedures, thus
making the legislation for the utilities sector more restrictive than envisaged by the EU
Utilities Directive. Turkey needs to ensure a more consistent legal framework for concessions
and public private partnerships to increase transparency and efficiency. There have been
various allegations of political influence on public tenders.
As regards remedies, the Public Procurement Board examined 5 093 complaints lodged by
unsatisfied tenderers. As in previous years, this corresponds to 4 % of the overall number of
tenders. The Turkish review mechanism needs to be further aligned with the acquis.
Conclusion
There was no progress in the area of public procurement. Although institutions and
administrative capacity are in place, public procurement policy coordination and possible
external influence on public tenders are issues of concern. Turkey needs to repeal derogations
and restrictive elements that are not in line with the acquis. An alignment strategy with a
time-bound action plan needs to be adopted. Overall, the level of preparedness in this area is
moderately advanced.
4.6.    Chapter 6: Company law
As regards company law, Turkey has continued adopting legislation implementing the
Turkish Commercial Code. Preparation of online company registration has continued and
chambers of commerce started receiving new company registration applications. The Capital
Markets Board adopted implementing regulations on the establishment and operations of
investment firms, registered capital, mergers and divestitures, material events, stock
buybacks, corporate governance, insider trading, market manipulation, and profit distribution.
Their alignment with the acquis is yet to be assessed.
In the area of corporate accounting, the legal and institutional framework for financial
reporting is in place. Statutory corporate reports are publicly available. Turkey continued
adopting the new Turkish accounting and financial reporting standards and amendments to the

                                              29
 existing ones based on the corresponding International Financial Reporting Standards. The
Turkish Public Oversight, Accounting and Auditing Standards Authority improved its
capacity.
Turkey published legislation to adopt international standards on auditing. In March 2014, the
scope of compulsory independent audit was extended by reducing the capital thresholds. The
number of approved independent auditors and audit firms increased. As of April 2014, there
were 7 488 approved independent auditors and 106 audit firms.
Conclusion
Progress was made in the area of company law. Turkey continued adopting legislation
implementing the Turkish Commercial Code. The Public Oversight, Accounting and Auditing
Standards Authority improved its capacity. The scope of compulsory independent audit has
been extended. Overall, Turkey is well advanced in this area.
4.7.     Chapter 7: Intellectual property law
In the area of copyright and neighbouring rights, the Directorate General for Copyright has
continued to increase its administrative capacity. Conflicts in collective management of rights
(CMR) are still a matter of concern. The new draft copyright law is still pending.
A law on industrial property rights has yet to be adopted. The Turkish Patent Institute has
further increased its administrative capacity. The institute improved justification of its
decisions, which sometimes are insufficiently detailed. The legal regime and practice for
dealing with bad-faith trademarks and industrial designs has undergone significant
transformation. As a result, the owner of a registered bad-faith trademark will no longer
prevail over the authentic owner of the right, irrespective of whether a trademark is registered
or not. The institute also started rejecting new bad-faith applications that were similar to
previously cancelled registrations by persistent applicants.
Further work is needed on geographical indicators (GIs) to reach a common legal
understanding for the effective protection of GIs. Baklava of Gaziantep has been registered as
a Turkish GI by the EU. In Turkey, Parma ham and Scotch whisky are registered as EU GIs.
The Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Coordination Board held its ninth meeting in
December 2013. The fourth meeting of the EU-Turkey IPR working group was held in April
2014 in Brussels with the participation of IPR holders from different sectors.
With regard to judicial enforcement, work continued on achieving a common legal
understanding on IPR issues. Alignment with the Enforcement Directive remains to be
addressed. The issues of returning counterfeit goods to offenders, storage by right holders of
confiscated goods and difficulties in obtaining preliminary injunctions remain unaddressed.
Trade in counterfeit and pirated goods shows a distinct pattern of organised crime and poses
serious risks to public health and consumer protection. In some areas, offenders have
threatened IPR holders’ attorneys. Turkish police held large-scale ex officio raids as a result of
complaints for counterfeit and pirated goods including for fake cancer pharmaceuticals.
Regarding IPR enforcement at customs, the system of online applications functioned
smoothly and the number of seizure applications increased slightly. Cooperation with rights
holders remained satisfactory. In-house training has been organised to increase enforcement
capacity and raise awareness among customs officers. Customs enforcement capacity needs to
be further strengthened in particular in ex officio inspections and destructions under the
simplified procedures. IPR customs legislation needs to be further aligned with the acquis.
Conclusion
There was some progress in the area of intellectual property law. Pending laws still need to be
adopted, in line with the acquis. Customs and police enforcement is improving. Cooperation

                                               30
 between IPR stakeholders and public bodies has improved. There is a need for more effective
awareness-raising of the importance of appropriate IPR protection. Overall, alignment with
the acquis is advanced.
4.8.         Chapter 8: Competition policy
The Competition Authority continued to develop its enforcement record in the area of anti-
trust and mergers. The Authority issued a strategic plan for 2014-18, and continued its
advocacy activities, in particular through publications for SMEs and consumers. The
authority’s administrative capacity remains high. It continued to preserve a satisfactory level
of administrative and operational independence, in spite of legislation adopted in 2011 that
allows the competent minister to monitor and inspect its activities. Alignment is sufficient in a
number of specific areas, such as the acquis on public undertakings and undertakings
enjoying exclusive and special rights. Alignment in the field of anti-trust and merger control
is advanced.
With respect to state aid, an ‘omnibus’ law postponed until 31 December 2014 the entry into
force of legislation implementing the State Aid Law. The Cabinet may decide to extend this
period for a year, renewable once. Another element of the bill requires authorities to upload
data on state aid they have granted into a central state aid information system. A penalty will
be imposed on senior staff in authorities that fail to upload such data. The Cabinet amended
the 2012 decree on the incentives package to increase the tax reduction applicable to priority
regional investments. A new implementing regulation allows the Treasury to fully assume the
financial responsibilities of private sector contractors in certain build-operate-transfer
projects; this regulation applies in case of contract termination; the total impact on the public
budget will be limited by a significant financial threshold, set in each year’s budget law.6 This
threshold can be doubled by a Cabinet decision. The State Aid Authority has not yet formally
set up a comprehensive state aid inventory. Nor has it adopted an action plan for aligning all
state aid schemes with the acquis, including the 2012 incentives package.
Conclusion
There has only been limited progress in this area. Anti-trust and merger control rules remain
largely aligned, and effectively enforced. However, there has been no progress in the field of
state aid. Legislation implementing the State Aid Law is required to make state aid control
effective, but has again been postponed. A number of aid schemes continue to breach the
customs union. Overall, Turkey is moderately advanced in this area.
4.9.         Chapter 9: Financial services
In the areas of banks and financial conglomerates, the Banking Regulatory and Supervisory
Agency (BRSA) adopted two new implementing regulations introducing capital conservation
and counter-cyclical buffers, as well as constraints on liquidity and leverage in accordance
with the Basel III framework. To improve financial stability, the regulator adopted new
prudential measures to tighten credit conditions for consumer loans and credit cards.
Authorities revised two implementing regulations on the Unemployment Insurance Fund and
the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool, requiring these to keep their deposits only at state-
owned banks, which may distort the level playing field in the sector. The banking regulator’s
decision allowing connected lending via indirect stakeholders may pave the way for abusive
lending practises. As part of the government’s response to the December 2013 corruption
allegations (see Political criteria — Government), an extensive reshuffling of the regulator’s
senior management took place. Perceptions of politically motivated decisions increased.
In the area of insurance and occupational pensions, the establishment of an independent
regulatory authority is still not on the agenda. Although they are increasing each year,

6
    The annual threshold for 2014 is the equivalent of approximately € 1 050 millions in local currency.

                                                          31
 minimum amounts of cover in compulsory motor insurance are much lower compared to the
EU standards.
There were no developments in the area of financial market infrastructure.
In the areas of securities markets and investment services, the Capital Markets Board has
adopted implementing regulations on the establishment and operations of investment firms,
registered capital, mergers and divestitures, material events, stock buybacks, corporate
governance, insider trading, market manipulation, and profit distribution.
Conclusion
There has been some progress in the area of financial services. The banking regulator adopted
two implementing regulations aimed at alignment with the Basel III framework. Authorities
adopted several implementing regulations in the areas of securities markets and investment
services. Perceptions of politically motivated decisions increased, particularly in the banking
sector. Overall, preparations in the area of financial services are advanced.
4.10.   Chapter 10: Information society and media
Concerning electronic communications and information and communication
technologies, there were no developments in legislative alignment on authorisation, spectrum
management and universal service regime. Work is needed to ensure the independence,
predictability and transparency of the Information and Communication Technologies
Authority, including the Telecommunications Communication Presidency (TIB). In addition,
work is needed to improve the fair allocation of spectrum bands and the effective use of
frequencies, broadband and infrastructure sharing. Concession agreements, which specifically
prevent operators from offering multiple bundled services, need to be aligned with the new
legal framework.
As regards competitive safeguards, the Information and Communication Technologies
Authority adopted a new regulation on administrative enforcement, specifying the framework
of infringements and penalties to be imposed on operators. The proper functioning of rights-
of-way and virtual mobile network operators has yet to be implemented. The mobile
broadband penetration rate increased to 31.5 % in 2013, while the fixed broadband penetration
rate increased slightly to 11 % in the same period. High and complicated taxation on
communication services remains a problem.
The Law on Regulation of Publications on the Internet and Combating Offences Committed
by Means of such Broadcasts was amended by granting excessive powers to TIB and
introducing further restrictions on the freedom of expression online. In March TIB banned
access to Twitter and You Tube, which later was restored (see Chapter 23 — Judiciary and
fundamental rights)
As regards information society services, Turkey has not yet transposed the acquis on e-
commerce nor has it signed up to the European Convention on the legal protection of services
based on conditional access. The rights and obligations of the Cyber Security Council were
set out in an ‘omnibus’ law in February 2014.
In the field of audiovisual policy, revisions of the bylaw on the procedures and principles of
media services aimed at alignment with the Audiovisual Media Services Directive came into
force in April. Provisions on reception and retransmission, jurisdiction, violations and
sanctions, advertising editorial responsibility and public access to major events have been
amended. Following the cancellation of the tender procedure by the Administrative Court of
Ankara, a decision on TV frequency planning is now under appeal in the Council of State.
Depending on the outcome of the case, a new tender will be launched or a new licensing
method will be applied. Delays in the planned digital switch over are likely to occur, however


                                              32
 the regulator envisages maintaining the assigned broadband frequencies so as not to
undermine Turkey’s international commitments.
Broadcasting in languages and dialects other than Turkish continued without restrictions on
content or time limits, and without sub-titling/consecutive translation requirements.
As regards transparency, the Radio and TV Supreme Council’s (RTÜK) decisions are
published on its website together with the experts’ reports that form the basis of the RTÜK’s
decisions and sanctions. The RTÜK continued its strict interpretation of the law on general
morality, protection of the family and obscenity. Increasing undue pressure on pro-opposition
media was reported, especially since December 2013. The RTÜK’s independence remains a
matter of concern, due to its political composition. However, during the municipal election
period, the RTÜK exercised its role in a non-discriminatory manner, fining TV stations
regardless of their political affiliation (pro-government and public broadcasters) for violating
the principle of equal opportunity in their coverage of political rallies. RTÜK does not publish
its monitoring results after the elections.
The public broadcaster TRT displayed bias in its coverage of election campaigns —
municipal as well as presidential- in favour of the governing party and its candidate, the Prime
Minister. (see Chapter 23 — Judiciary and fundamental rights)
Conclusion
There was no progress in the area of electronic communications with regard to aligning
legislation with the EU acquis, except as regards competitive safeguards, where a new
regulation was adopted. Further work is required on the alignment of information society
services legislation with the acquis and on its implementation, while particularly protecting
freedom of expression, privacy and personal data. Some progress has been made in the field
of audiovisual policy. Changes to the election procedure for members of the RTÜK and the
Information      and     Communication      Technologies      Authority/Telecommunications
Communication Presidency would minimise the risk of political pressure and improve the
perception of independence. Overall, preparations are moderately advanced in this area.
4.11.   Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development
As regards horizontal issues, the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock has progressed
in the development of its agricultural information system, including preparation of the
agricultural census. The farm accountancy data network has expanded to 54 provinces and
work is under way to reach all 81 provinces in the coming year. Arrangements for the
publication of its output and its use in policy analysis are not yet in place. The strategy for
agricultural statistics has still to be adopted.
Regarding direct support to producers, Turkey has made no further steps towards drafting a
strategy for adjusting its agricultural support policy in line with the common agricultural
policy (CAP). The agricultural budget for 2014 continues to increase. Turkey has started to
develop its land parcel identification system, a key component of the integrated administration
and control system.
The Turkish authorities have continued to impose unjustified restrictions on imports of live
cattle, beef meat and derivative products from the EU, thus curtailing the partial progress
reported between 2010 and 2012. Turkey should comply with its bilateral obligations under
the trade agreement for agricultural products and take action to resolve this long-standing
issue.
In the field of rural development, Turkey has achieved unconditional conferral of
management of EU funds under the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance for Rural
Development (IPARD) for a further six provinces. Conferral of management has also been
granted to a fourth measure, technical assistance. Turkey has also advanced with preparations

                                              33
 for implementing a pilot agri-environment measure. Most importantly, implementation of
IPARD has improved to the degree that € 134 million of EU funds were paid to beneficiaries
in 2013, which meant avoiding a decommitment of EU funds. The project pipeline is solid as
each call attracts a high number of relevant projects. Although there is little improvement to
the provision of advisory services, access to credit has been enhanced, including European
Investment Bank support. There have been improvements to the management structure in the
IPARD managing authority and work is being done to improve strategic development.
Legislation on all relevant aspects of organic farming has been further aligned with the
acquis.
Conclusion
There has been uneven progress on alignment in the area of agriculture and rural
development. Implementation of the pre-accession rural development programme has
advanced well. Whilst the farm accountancy data network is expanding, its effectiveness has
yet to be observed. The de facto import ban on live cattle, beef meat and derivative products
has not been lifted and there are no strategies in place for redirecting agricultural support, nor
for agricultural statistics. Overall, preparations in the area of agriculture and rural
development are at an early stage.
4.12.    Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy
Developments on the alignment and implementation of the acquis on general food safety
issues have been limited. As concerns veterinary policy, work on identification and
registration of bovines and small ruminants has continued. Full functionality of land and
seaport border inspection posts and the border inspection post at Sabiha Gokcen Airport in
Istanbul has still not been ensured.
Turkey continued its fight against animal diseases. In order to sustain the foot and mouth
disease-free status of the Thrace region, mass vaccination with strict movement controls
between Thrace and Anatolia has continued. A regulation concerning animal welfare at
slaughter has been adopted, but overall implementation of animal welfare legislation has
remained limited. A regulation on the control of salmonella and other identified foodborne
zoonoses factors has been implemented. There has been no progress on alignment of
legislation on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) and no surveillance system
is in place. For more information on the de facto import ban on live cattle, beef meat and
derivative products, see Chapter 11 — Agriculture and rural development.
Turkey’s training, inspection and monitoring programmes have continued regarding placing
on the market of food, feed and animal by-products. There has been limited progress on
the development of the national upgrading plan for agri-food establishments. The entry into
force of the legislation on microbiological criteria for raw milk has been postponed.
Substantial work is needed to implement the new rules for the registration and approval of
food establishments. Risk-based official inspections have continued. Significant work is
needed for the adaptation of the animal by-products sector to the new rules and the full
implementation of these. Inspection funding arrangements have not yet been aligned with the
EU system.
As regards food safety rules, legislative alignment and implementation have advanced on a
number of issues, such as labelling, additives and purity criteria, flavourings and food
supplements. However, the legislation that has been adopted is not fully compliant with the
acquis. New rules on labelling and a tracking system have been adopted for certain foodstuffs,
which creates unnecessary burden for businesses. Alignment in the area of food enzymes and
novel foods has not yet been completed. Regarding specific rules for feed, a communiqué
concerning undesirable substances in feed has been adopted.


                                               34
 Concerning phytosanitary policy, pest control programmes have been implemented.
Conclusion
Progress in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy has remained limited.
Further substantial work is needed to advance on full implementation of the acquis in this
area. Significant work is needed on upgrading agri-food establishments to meet EU standards,
the identification and registration of animals, animal welfare, animal by-products and the fight
against animal diseases. Overall, preparations in this area are at an early stage.
4.13.    Chapter 13: Fisheries
In terms of legislative alignment, Turkey continued studies for revision of the Fisheries Law,
which are expected to take into account the newly reformed common fisheries policy.
Institutional capacity has improved in the Directorate General for Fisheries and Aquaculture
in the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock and in provincial administrations, through
internal training programmes.
In the field of resources and fleet management, the scope of the fishing vessels
decommissioning scheme, which has been extended to cover the vessels longer than 10 m,
will further help reduce the fishing capacity. The national fisheries data collection programme
has been improved to cover the samples from vessels with a length of at least 10 m. The scope
and functionality of the fisheries information system has been further increased. A new
fisheries port office was opened, bringing the total number of these offices to 43.
The Fisheries Dialogue Group between Turkey and the European Commission has improved
cooperation in several forums (e.g. the International Commission for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tunas — ICCAT and General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean —
GFCM) and also contributed to improvements in inspection and control.
There have been no improvements on structural actions, market policy and state aid.
However, the recently launched project on fishery producer organisations can be seen as an
initial step to organise the market in line with the acquis.
There were developments in the area of international agreements. Turkey has actively
participated in regional fisheries management organisations such as GFCM and ICCAT, and
further aligned its measures with their recommendations. The Law on the Adoption of the
Agreement on the Central Asian and Caucasus Regional Fisheries and Aquaculture
Commission has been adopted. As the EU implements United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea provisions, inter alia in the Common Fisheries Policy, ratification of UNCLOS by
Turkey would improve cooperation with the EU in the area of fisheries and maritime policy.
Conclusion
There has been some progress with regard to resources and fleet management, inspection and
control, and international agreements. Further work is needed in the field of legislative
alignment, structural action, market policy and state aid. Overall, alignment in this area is at a
very early stage.
4.14.    Chapter 14: Transport policy
In the area of road transport, a circular on safety advisors of dangerous goods was issued in
December 2013 and a new communiqué on road-side checks for dangerous goods was
published in May 2014. The gradual withdrawal from the road of old commercial vehicles
used in passenger/goods transport and manufactured before 1990 has continued through tax
incentives. So far, 118 557 pre-1990 motor vehicles have been withdrawn from the market.
There is a considerable increase in checks on commercial vehicles to ensure compliance with
rules on weight, dimension and other aspects.


                                               35
 On rail transport, the railway operator has not yet been unbundled. The law on liberalisation
of railways needs significant amendment, as it does not comply with the EU acquis in
creating the necessary conditions for a competitive and transparent market in which
independence of essential functions are ensured. The financial and institutional autonomy of
the rail regulator (DGRR) from the Ministry of Transport is the foremost concern. The
regulator has drafted regulations on licensing, rolling stock registry, safety, network access
and charging but they have not yet been approved. The need for a comprehensive legal
framework for the railways market is apparent. The current Turkish State Railways (TCDD)
organisational structure, where the infrastructure manager owns and finances the transport
operator, is inconsistent with the acquis. TCDD does not use cost-based accounting and its
operational losses and the method of subsidisation are a cause for concern especially for
sustainability of high speed train operations in the longer term.
On intermodal transport, the Directorate General for Combined Transport adopted a
strategy and drafted legislation to incentivise and promote combined transport, but it has not
yet been approved. A permanent forum needs to be established to act as a focal point in
bringing together a diverse set of public and private institutions.
In the area of air transport, the horizontal agreement is still awaiting signature. It is a major
milestone to further integration in the aviation field. The Directorate General for Civil
Aviation recruited 35 new members of staff and obtained its quality management certificate.
The Directorate General issued regulations to further align Turkey with the acquis and with
European Aviation Safety Agency requirements on commercial air operators, airworthiness,
and air vessel maintenance personnel. Air traffic management is still suffering from a lack of
international cooperation. The lack of communication between air traffic control centres in
Turkey and Cyprus seriously compromises air safety in the Nicosia flight information region.
An operational solution needs to be found urgently to resolve this safety issue.
In the field of maritime transport, Turkey became party to the Ballast Water Management
Convention, the Convention on the Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic, and Annex
VI of the International Convention on the Prevention of Pollution from Ships. Turkey also
successfully completed its voluntary International Maritime Organisation member audit in
2014, resulting in minor findings. Turkey has not yet aligned with the acquis on reporting
formalities for ships. As long as restrictions remain in place on vessels and aircrafts that are
registered in Cyprus, vessels of any nationality related to the Republic of Cyprus in terms of
ownership or ship management, or whose last port of call was in Cyprus, Turkey will not be
in a position to fully implement the acquis relating to this chapter.
Conclusion
There has been some progress in the area of transport policy, in particular on institutional
capacity and road transport safety. Further significant work is needed on railways. Overall,
Turkey is moderately advanced in the transport sector.
4.15.    Chapter 15: Energy
Solid foundations are being laid for the security of supply of gas, with the adoption in
December 2013 of the final investment decisions for the three Southern Gas Corridor projects:
the Shah Deniz II field, the trans-Anatolian pipeline and the trans-Adriatic pipeline. These
decisions ensure the interoperability and connectivity of these projects. Tendering for the
trans-Anatolian pipeline project on the procurement and construction of the pipelines is
ongoing and the works are scheduled for completion in 2018/19. Licenses were granted to
import 3.2 billion cubic meters of gas annually from Northern Iraq, and to export gas to
Greece. Two more companies were granted natural gas underground storage licenses. The
security of supply is further improved with the completion of the electric interconnections
with Bulgaria and Georgia. (See Chapter 21- Trans-European networks). Turkey has

                                               36
 contributed to the energy security stress test carried out by the European Commission in the
framework of the European Energy Security Strategy.
Regarding the internal energy market, the majority of the pending implementing regulations
provided for under the new Electricity Market Law were issued during the reporting period.
Implementing regulations on competition, promotion, protection, utilisation, certification and
support of renewable energy sources were issued in the last quarter of 2013, while regulations
on electricity distribution, connection, system usage, network code, notification, export and
import and consumer services were adopted in 2014. The threshold for consumer eligibility
(to freely choose electricity supplier) was further reduced from 5000 kWh to 4500 kWh for
2014, which corresponds to a theoretical market opening of 85 %, the aim being that all
consumers be eligible by 2015. The transfer of distribution assets to private companies was
completed although progress in the privatisation of generation assets remained limited due to
difficulties experienced by potential investors in securing the necessary financing. The
regulation on the functioning of the Energy Markets Operation Joint Stock Company (EPIAS)
was not issued by the deadline set in law, but it is expected to be operational by the end of
2014. Cost-based tariffs need to be applied; in their absence, cross-subsidies between
consumers in the national tariff will continue until 2016.
Regarding the natural gas market, the eligibility threshold for household consumers was
reduced to 100 000 m3 for 2014. The Energy Market Regulatory Authority continued its work
to tender new distribution networks for the remaining five cities which are not connected to
the gas system. By the end of August 2014, out of 76 cities where the gas distribution tender
had been completed, 69 cities have started using natural gas. A draft law to amend the Natural
Gas Market Law is awaiting a decision by parliament.
Several implementing regulations were issued under the Electricity Market Law, including on
unlicensed electricity generation, aiming to promote small-scale renewable energy sources.
The government prolonged the existing feed-in tariffs’ application period for an additional 10
years, from 2016. The Energy Market Regulatory Authority issued an invitation for pre-
licence applications for 3000 MW of wind power plants. Evaluation of the pre-licence
applications for generating 600 MW of electricity from solar energy sources continued. The
proportion of electricity generation provided by renewable energy sources increased from
27 % in 2012 to 29 % in 2013; most of the increase came from new wind power plants.
Developments continued on authorisations for energy efficiency services and energy
management programmes. In April 2014, a public consultation was launched on a policy to
promote high-efficiency cogeneration in line with the Energy Efficiency Directive. In March
2014, the Energy Charter Secretariat in Brussels published an in-depth energy efficiency
policy review of Turkey, which urges the government to strengthen the capacity of the
Ministry of Energy, so as to align Turkish energy efficiency legislation with the Energy
Efficiency Directive. It also recommends preparing short-term action plans with priorities,
intermediate milestones, and monitoring and evaluation methods to implement properly the
energy efficiency strategy paper. The Energy Efficiency Law and related legislation is not yet
aligned with the Energy Efficiency Directive.
Regarding nuclear safety and radiation protection, Turkey and Japan signed an agreement
in October 2013 to build Turkey’s second nuclear power plant in Sinop, with a capacity of
4 500 MW. In January 2014, the government ratified the ‘agreement between Turkey and
Japan for cooperation in the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes’. The long-awaited
draft framework law on nuclear energy and radiation and the establishment of an independent
regulatory authority was opened for consultation. It still needs to be adopted. The law on
acceding to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety
of Radioactive Waste Management is still awaiting approval by parliament.


                                             37
 Conclusion
There was progress in the field of energy, especially on security of supply, on the internal
market for electricity, and on renewable energy. However, further work is required on natural
gas, energy efficiency and nuclear safety and radiation protection, in particular on alignment
with the relevant EU directives. A transparent and cost-based pricing mechanism for
electricity and gas has not yet been properly implemented. Overall, Turkey is at an advanced
level of alignment in the field of energy.
4.16.    Chapter 16: Taxation
In the field of indirect taxation legislation, Turkey’s value added tax (VAT) is still not in
line with the acquis. The structure, exemptions, special schemes and the scope of reduced
rates remain to be further aligned. VAT regulations were codified.
With regard to excise duties on tobacco products, despite the recently introduced specific
excise duty on cigarettes, discrepancies with the EU acquis remain in terms of the minimum
specific excise and the minimum overall excise taxes on cigarettes. On the other hand, and in
line with the 2009 Action Plan, Turkey reduced the specific duty that finances the tobacco
fund on imported unprocessed tobacco from USD 1500 to USD 1200 per tonne. This is a
positive step for the eventual elimination of the current discriminatory practices.
With regard to excises on alcoholic beverages, the gap between the duties applied to imported
drinks and for comparable domestic drinks has increased. This is not in line with the 2009
Action Plan. With regards to energy taxation, Turkey amended its legislation to apply an ad
valorem excise duty instead of a specific duty particularly on mineral oils and motor fuels,
thus broadening the scope of differences with the EU acquis.
As regards direct taxation, the income tax law is still being revised in Parliament.
In the field of administrative cooperation and mutual assistance, the Turkish Revenue
Administration monitored the activities envisaged in the action plan for combating the
informal economy.
Regarding operational capacity and computerisation, the Revenue Administration
continued to promote voluntary compliance by simplifying procedures, improving
enforcement and improving taxpayer services. The procedures for VAT refunds were
streamlined and an online system for processing refund requests was launched. The Tax
Inspectors Board continued to consolidate its operational capacity.
Conclusion
There has been limited progress on legislative alignment in this chapter and in some areas
divergence with the acquis has increased. The gradual elimination of discriminatory practices
in excise taxation is essential for making further progress. Work continued on strengthening
the tax administration, combating the informal economy and increasing voluntary compliance.
Overall, preparedness in this chapter is moderately advanced.
4.17.    Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy
As regards monetary policy, the central bank continued to pursue price stability and financial
stability objectives through multiple instruments, with mixed results. Consumer price inflation
reached 7.4 % by the end of 2013, which remained above the central bank’s target of 5 % with
a tolerance band of +/- 2 percentage points. Following market pressure on the lira, the central
bank increased short-term interest rates sharply. The government and the central bank decide
jointly on the inflation target. The central bank’s statute does not guarantee its full
independence. Political pressure on the monetary policy authority to keep interest rates low
further increased. Discriminatory withholding tax rates continue to favour public sector debt


                                              38
 instruments over private ones, which is not in line with the principle of prohibiting privileged
access to financial institutions by the public sector.
As for economic policy, in February 2014, Turkey submitted its 2014 Pre-accession
Economic Programme with some delay and without fully meeting the expected standards. The
programme presents an optimistic scenario with higher growth, a smaller current account
deficit and lower inflation, which does not take into account recent market and policy
developments. The Turkish economy remained vulnerable to external shocks due to low
domestic savings and heavy reliance on short-term capital inflows. Economic policy
formulation remained ad hoc and fragmented. Significant work is needed in order for Turkey
to align with Directive 85/2011 on the requirements for budgetary frameworks including the
introduction of a fiscal rule.
Conclusion
There has been little progress on economic and monetary policy. In monetary policy,
alignment with the acquis is advanced, though incomplete. Concerns about the independence
of the central bank have intensified. Economic policy formulation remains ad hoc. Overall,
Turkey’s preparedness in economic and monetary policy remained advanced.
4.18.   Chapter 18: Statistics
As regards statistical infrastructure, further work is needed to improve cooperation between
the Turkish Statistical Institute (‘TurkStat’) and the main data providers, particularly the
Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock, and the Social Security
Institution.
In the area of classifications and registers, TurkStat started publishing producer price indices
and quarterly national accounts according to NACE Rev 2.
As for sectoral statistics, work continued on revising the strategy to improve agriculture
statistics in Turkey, in order to meet the benchmark regarding a detailed description of the
progress made in setting up a farm register and on the expected methodology and
organisational set-up to be used for the collection of statistics. Turkey started implementing
the continuous labour force survey. Studies for the agriculture census have been undertaken.
Turkey needs to submit key national account indicators, together with the methodology used,
which is essential for further progress on this chapter. Further improvement is needed in
regional statistics.
Conclusion
There has been progress on statistics, with the revision of producer price indices and quarterly
national accounts. Further work is needed on national accounts, agriculture statistics, regional
statistics, and to strengthen the cooperation between TurkStat and main data providers.
Overall, the level of alignment with the acquis is advanced.
4.19.   Chapter 19: Social policy and employment
Alignment of Turkish labour law with the acquis and implementation of the relevant
legislation needs to be improved. The rate of unregistered employment, not covered by the
labour law, further fell to 33.6 %, albeit with strong differences based on sector, employment
status and gender. Subcontracted workers are particularly at risk of informal employment,
poor working conditions, unjustified dismissals and difficulties in joining trade unions.
Turkey needs to regulate sub-contracted and other forms of employment, such as temporary
work, in line with the EU acquis. The persistent problem of child labour is addressed in the
December 2013 children’s rights national strategy.
Turkey ratified International Labour Organisation Convention no 187 on the Promotional
Framework for Occupational Safety and Health. Turkey adopted all implementing regulations

                                              39
 relating to its new framework law on health and safety at work, but the law is not yet fully
applicable; progress is needed to achieve complete entry into force and to address the serious
gaps in effective prevention and inspection in partnership with the social partners and
professional organisations. The mining and quarrying sector remains the most risky as
illustrated by the Soma mine disaster, as well as the construction sector. In September 2014,
new legal provisions have been adopted, aimed at improving the working conditions for
miners. The monitoring of fatal workplace accidents needs to be more transparent, as non-
governmental figures are much higher than official statistics.
In the area of social dialogue, implementing regulations of the law on trade unions in the
private sector were adopted. The use of the e-state portal for registration/withdrawal of union
membership led to a 15.2 % increase in the number of union members since July 2013; but
confidentiality of the portal’s data needs to be improved to avoid data misuse. The coverage
of collective agreements remained low. Restrictive double thresholds for collective
bargaining, uncertain protection for union members against dismissals, and gaps in the right
to organise, bargain and strike remain the most relevant issues in this area. In a law adopted in
September the threshold allowing trade unions to negotiate collective agreements
(representing the ratio of their members to the workforce of the company’s branch of activity)
was set permanently at 1 %. This continues to represent a significant obstacle for trade unions
to enter into collective bargaining.
In employment policy the first national employment strategy was adopted, signalling long
term policy planning and setting ambitious employment targets. Turkey is also preparing its
first employment and social reform programme. Labour market performance remained rather
stable. Male (15-64 year-olds) participation (75.6 %) and employment rates (69.5 %) are at
levels comparable to the EU, while female participation (33.2 %) and employment (29.6 %)
rates remain well below EU levels. At 25.5 % the percentage of young people not in
employment, education or training continued to decrease but remains high. The
unemployment rate slightly increased to 8.9 %, (16.9 % for young people). The public
employment service (ISKUR) increased its capacity, and the outreach of its services.
As regards preparations for the European Social Fund (ESF), the Ministry of Labour and
Social Security continued to manage the IPA Human Resources Development Operational
Programme. With an increase in staffing, the work on programming, tendering, monitoring
and evaluation has been stepped up; however, the absorption of available funds continues to
be a challenge. (See also Chapter 22 — regional policy and coordination of structural
instruments)
In the field of social inclusion, an integrated and comprehensive policy framework still needs
to be developed. Despite increase in the social spending budget, the relative poverty rate
(22.6 %), the poverty gap (29.4 %) and income inequality (GINI 0.402) remain high compared
to EU averages. The action plan to encourage social assistance recipients to enter the formal
labour market has delivered some positive results and indicates the need to step up active
labour market policies. Employment opportunities in the public sector for people with
disabilities continued to increase, together with new financial incentives for creating sheltered
workshops in the private sector. A national Roma integration strategy is being prepared.
In the area of social protection the sustainability of the social security system, which reported
increasing deficits due to high pension and health expenditure, could be strengthened by
higher employment rates of women and youth, and by reducing undeclared work. The health
insurance system provides sustainable, largely accessible and almost universal health care
coverage, despite some regional inequalities in terms of quality of service provision. Turkey
lacks a comprehensive long term care system. It needs a genuine de-institutionalisation of
long term care services for children and people with disabilities accompanied by the


                                               40
 development of community-based alternatives. Implementation of the national ageing action
plan is expected to improve active ageing policies.
In the field of anti-discrimination, the principle of non-discrimination on the basis of
disability was introduced into the national education law and the labour law. Furthermore, a
revision of Article 122 of the Turkish Penal Code introduced penalties for discriminatory,
hate based practices in economic activities and in employment. There is still no protective
legislation regarding discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or age. (See also
Chapter 23— Judiciary and fundamental rights)
In the field of equal opportunities for women and men, the equality body required by the
acquis has not been created. The lack of childcare facilities impedes women’s labour market
integration, against a background of gender-based segregation of domestic duties including
caring for older people. There have been many shortcomings in the implementation and
proper monitoring of the government circular on increasing women’s employment and equal
opportunities, as this is not considered as high priority by many stakeholders. Bullying and
sexual harassment at work needs to be looked into for both genders as a possible factor
hindering employment and decent working conditions. (See also Chapter 23— Judiciary and
fundamental rights)
Conclusion
There was some progress in the area of social policy and employment, where the rate of
unregistered employment has been decreasing, but important gaps remain. Social dialogue
mechanisms do not function effectively as a result of obstacles in legislation which need to be
removed. Labour law needs to be amended and enforced for the benefit of the entire
workforce. Working conditions, including health and safety at work have yet to be addressed.
Anti-discrimination, social inclusion and social protection policies and practices need to be
improved. Overall, legal alignment in this area is moderately advanced.
4.20.   Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy
On the enterprise and industrial policy principles, the Ministry of Science, Industry and
Technology continued to implement the 2011-14 industrial strategy and action plan and
started work on a follow-up strategy for the upcoming period.
As regards enterprise and industrial policy instruments, a new implementing regulation
was adopted making incubation centres and technology transfer offices compulsory for the
establishment of technology development zones. In 2013, the 58 technology development
zones, 40 of them operational, were exempted from the Public Procurement Law. They
employ ca. 18 500 R&D personnel and involve 2 778 companies. According to the latest
figures, exports from the zones amounted to € 1.1 billion. Turkey is establishing its first
thematic technopark in Istanbul in order to initiate innovate technologies for the finance
sector. A new law was adopted supporting R&D infrastructure within universities and higher
education institutions. Turkey continued its support programmes on competitiveness, R&D
and innovation. The Ministry of Science, Industry and Technology and its affiliated bodies
such as TUBITAK currently manage more than 30 programmes. Policy instruments from the
Ministry of Economy and Ministry of Development, other than tax incentives granted by the
Ministry of Finance on R&D, are not integrated into a comprehensive framework for better
impact. Turkey continued to extend loan programmes to SMEs via various banks with interest
rate subsidy support. SMEs use about 25 % of the available loans on the market, which is
under the SMEs share in the economy. The use of venture capital is low. Turkey continued to
implement the Small Business Act and participate in the Enterprise Europe Network. Turkey
has applied for the next COSME programme. A participation in the COPERNICUS
programme remains to be decided.


                                              41
 Conclusion
Turkey has made further progress on enterprise and industrial policy principles and
instruments and meets the requirements of the acquis in this area. Overall, preparations in this
area are advanced.
4.21.    Chapter 21: Trans-European networks
In the area of transport networks, the Ministry of Transport, Maritime Affairs and
Telecommunications has reached the final stage in the preparation of a transport master plan
and a transport information system. Preparatory work for a logistical master plan study has
started in parallel. Turkey announced that it would also conduct a study to update plans for the
future trans-European transport network (TEN-T) in Turkey in accordance with the revised
TEN-T guidelines. Turkey continued to invest ambitiously in the future TEN-T railway
network.
Regarding the area of energy networks, the final investment decisions were taken in
December 2013 for the three Southern Gas Corridor projects: the Shah Deniz II field, the
trans-Anatolian pipeline and the trans-Adriatic pipeline. These decisions ensure the
interoperability and connectivity of the projects. Tendering for the trans-Anatolian pipeline
project on the procurement and construction of the pipelines is ongoing. In March 2014,
Turkey and Bulgaria agreed to build a gas pipeline to connect the two countries. The Ministry
of Energy has submitted the long-awaited draft law on transit of gas and oil to the public
authorities for consultation in the fourth quarter of 2013. (See also Chapter 15 — Energy).
As regards electricity networks, while the final test phase of the parallel trial interconnection
of the Turkish power grid with the European Network of Transmission System Operators for
Electricity (ENTSO-E)’s Continental European Synchronous Area has continued, the
ENTSO-E has initiated the negotiations with the Turkish transmission system operator
(TEIAS) on a long-term agreement which will enable commercial energy exchanges between
the Turkish transmission system operator and the transmission system operators of the
ENTSO-E area in both directions. In February 2014, Romania and Turkey agreed to develop
interconnections to facilitate electricity exchanges. The construction of a 400 kV
asynchronous electricity interconnection with Georgia was completed and the electricity
exchange started in the second quarter of 2014. Additional new lines between Turkey,
Bulgaria and Romania are in the planning phase.
Conclusion
Good progress has been made in the area of trans-European networks. Turkey has taken
significant steps to define the new TEN-T network by reaching the final stages in the
development of a master plan. Gas pipeline and electric interconnection projects are
adequately advancing. Turkey is encouraged to continue its work in these areas. Overall,
alignment on this chapter is advanced.
4.22.    Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments
Negotiations on Chapter 22 were opened in November 2013, after Turkey had submitted an
action plan to meet the acquis regulatory and operational requirements. Preparatory work on
the National Strategy for Regional Development has not yet been finalised.
As regards the institutional framework, interinstitutional cooperation and coordination has
improved and some progress has been made in the implementation of the operational
programmes. The Ministry of Development has ensured coordination between institutions and
committees at various levels. After the 2014 local elections, the number of metropolitan
municipalities increased and their boundaries were extended. This will have an impact on
actions and activities, especially under the environment operational programme.


                                               42
 Technical assistance projects and training programmes are being implemented to build the
administrative capacity of IPA institutions and development agencies. The agencies
continued to prepare regional plans covering 2014-23, which will come into force in 2014.
With regard to programming, the Indicative Strategy Paper for Turkey has been adopted.
Drafting of sectoral operational programmes covering 2014-16 has started for some sectors.
In the field of monitoring and evaluation, an integrated monitoring information system has
been developed and is now operational. The Ministry of Development is preparing reports to
further develop this system and prepare Turkey for cohesion policy requirements. Monitoring
of programmes under IPA components III and IV needs to be further improved. The Ministry
of Development has produced evaluation guidelines but IPA bodies’ evaluation capacity
needs to be strengthened further.
In the area of financial management, the capacity to absorb funds continues to be a major
issue under IPA components III and IV, and contracting and disbursement rates are still very
low. The high risk of funds decommitment, which materialised in 2013, persists in 2014 and
in subsequent years. The operating structures and contracting authorities (OS) continued to
increase their capacity through new recruitment and training activities, but this has been offset
by the numerous changes in the senior management of the OS. OS procurement units urgently
need further strengthening and their capacity must be increased to reduce future
decommitment risks.
Conclusion
Some progress was made in the field of regional policy and the coordination of structural
instruments. This includes the implementation of projects and programmes under IPA
components III and IV. The administrative capacity of the IPA institutions remains a concern
and needs further strengthening to accelerate programme implementation, improve delivery
quality and avoid loss of funds. Overall, preparations in this area are moderately advanced.
4.23.    Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights
Judicial system
The objectives of the Justice Ministry’s 2009 judicial reform strategy were to a large extent
achieved; a revision to the strategy is ongoing.
As regards the independence of the judiciary, in response to the allegation of corruption (see
Political criteria — Government) amendments to the Law on the High Council of Judges and
Prosecutors (HSYK) and the Law on the Justice Academy were adopted in February, in a very
short period of time and with no proper stakeholder consultation.
The amendments to the law on the HSYK provided for the transfer of significant powers from
the plenary to the Minister of Justice and raised thus serious concerns over the independence
of the judiciary and the separation of powers. Stakeholders reacted strongly to the initial
proposals and the legislation adopted. Upon the law’s entry into force, all staff working for
the HSYK was laid off including the Secretary General, Deputy Secretaries General, the
President and Deputy Presidents of the Inspection Board, inspectors, rapporteur judges and
administrative staff. They were replaced by staff nominated by the Minister of Justice, in his
capacity as President of the HSYK. A number of former staff (approximately 66 %) was
reappointed.
The Turkish Constitutional Court found a number of provisions unconstitutional and gave the
legislature a deadline of three months to adopt revised legislation. Among these provisions
were those laying staff off; however, the decision of the Court had no retroactive effect. As a
result, many members of staff laid off were not re-hired and newly appointed staff remained
in place. In June, parliament adopted legislation to implement the Constitutional Court’s
decision. This legislation brought back into force the legal provisions introduced in 2010,
                                               43
 restoring the role of the plenary. However, this includes the reintroduction of a plural voting
system whereby every judge and prosecutor has the right to cast as many votes as the number
of Council members to be elected. In this system, candidates who receive the majority of
votes could take all seats, exclude those candidates supported by other voters and prevent a
more pluralistic High Council that would better represent the Turkish judiciary as a whole.
The participation and the role of the executive in the Council should be reduced. The judicial
review should be extended to all Council’s decisions which potentially interfere with the
independence or impartiality or individual rights of judges and prosecutors.
On 19 December, the government amended the regulation on judicial police to require law
enforcement officers, when acting upon instructions of prosecutors, to notify their police
hierarchy about any criminal notices or complaints. On 25 December, police did not follow
instructions from prosecutors to detain suspects as part of two investigations into alleged
corruption. The HSYK issued a statement on 26 December criticising this amendment as
being contrary to judicial independence. On 27 December, the Council of State suspended
implementation of the amendment considering it to be contrary to the Code on Criminal
Procedures. The Minister of Justice, in his capacity as President of the HSYK, decided on 30
December that any HSYK public statement should receive his prior approval.
Prosecutors involved in the December 2013 anti-corruption investigations were reassigned or
removed. The HSYK launched disciplinary and criminal investigations against a number of
them. A large number of police officers were removed, reassigned, or even detained.
The amendments also increased the executive’s control over the Justice Academy. This, in
turn, increases the executive’s control over the HSYK as one member of the HSYK is
appointed by the Academy. Management and instructors at the Justice Academy were
replaced.
The Constitutional Court continued to receive individual applications. The court’s human
resources increased. As of July 2014 the number of applications made to the court was 22 677.
The court decided in 9 683 cases, while rejected or found inadmissible 149 cases; work
continued on 12 845 cases. In its judgment on the Twitter access ban, the court argued that the
domestic remedy had proved to be ineffective — referring to the failure of the authorities to
implement a court decision in good time. In May, the court ruled that the YouTube access
ban, imposed in March without a court decision, violated the rights of users and freedom of
expression. In July the court found that the investigation of the Hrant Dink’s murder had not
been conducted in an effective manner and that the authorities failed to properly inform the
family about conduct of the case. Other decisions safeguarded the right to liberty and security
and the right to a fair trial and opened the way for re-trials in a number of high-profile cases.
These decisions showed the importance of the 2010 introduction of the individual application
procedure and highlighted the resilience of the Turkish constitutional system.
With regard to impartiality, no improvements were made on the issue of practical
arrangements at courthouses and during trials regarding judges, prosecutors and the guarantee
of equality of arms for the prosecution and the defence. This continued to raise questions on
the perception of the impartiality of judges.
With regard to the efficiency of the judiciary, the number of pending cases before the Court of
Cassation increased to 582 642 in July 2014 compared to 544 169 in the same period of 2013.
The Council of State’ pending cases decreased in 2014 compared to 2013. With respect to
first-instance courts, the number of criminal cases pending decreased from 1 580 055 to
1 401 944 as of 18 August 2014. The number of pending civil cases remained approximately
the same. A reliable registration system and set of indicators should be established to allow
measuring the efficiency of the Turkish justice system.



                                               44
 The 2014 budget for the judiciary was approximately € 3 billion, roughly 0.48 % of Turkey’s
GDP. At the end of August 2014, the total number of judges and prosecutors, including those
in the administrative judiciary, was 13 989, of whom a quarter were women. At the end of
2013, 36 % of judges and 6.6 % of prosecutors were women. There were 11.6 judges and 6.1
prosecutors per 100 000 people.
In February, the specially authorised courts were abolished. By abrogating Article 10 of the
Anti-Terror Law in its entirety, the law suppressed, together with the regional serious crimes
courts, their special powers and reduced the maximum period of detention on remand from
ten to five years. These reforms were adopted without transitional provisions, thus for
ongoing cases new panels of judges will have to reconsider evidence obtained by previous
panels. This risks affecting the effectiveness of the courts that are already overburdened. The
safeguards introduced in relation to pre-trial detention orders, searches orders, seizing assets,
the interceptions of communications and the appointment of undercover agents need to be
followed up closely, as they risk creating insurmountable problems during the investigation
phase. The lower statutory maximum limit of five years of pre-trial detention remains
excessive if compared with practice of EU Member States. The frequent and hasty changes to
the justice system, with no proper stakeholder consultation, risk reducing the efficiency of the
Turkish criminal justice system.
The regional courts of appeal which, by law, should have been in operation by 2007 are now
planned to be established in November 2014.
The implementation of the January 2013 law that established a Human Rights Compensation
Commission within the Ministry of Justice provided positive results. This is a domestic
remedy concerning length of judicial proceedings and non-enforcement or delayed
enforcement of judicial decisions. As of August 2014 the Commission decided on 4 710
applications out of 5 925 claims. In total 1 180 decisions (about 25 %) were objected to by the
applicant. The average duration for examining cases was 165 days.
Poor implementation of cross-examination at trial and the poor quality or lack of reasoning in
indictments were still causes for serious concern. The Anti-Terror Law is excessive in scope
and the extensive use of secret witnesses, particularly in cases related to state security,
remained a source of concern. Bar Associations reported that courts did not usually allow
defence attorneys to conduct questioning but instead asked them to submit questions for the
court to ask. The failure of officials to submit statements promptly or attend trials, particularly
in cases against security officials, resulted in delayed proceedings.
Generally, the Turkish rate of detention before final conviction continued to be high.
Moreover, the duration of pre-trial detention is often excessive. Decisions relating to
detention or continuation of detention were regularly not supported by adequate reasoning,
referring to specific facts, evidence and grounds justifying the deprivation of liberty, as
required by law. This was notably the case where accusations related to the security of the
state, organised crime and terrorism.
In December, in the Ergenekon case, the Constitutional Court ruled that the detention of two
of the suspects had exceeded a reasonable amount of time and that their right to be elected as
MPs had been violated. They were released from prison and entered parliament. Similar
decisions followed in other cases; as a result, all MPs-elect were released from prison.
Until the adoption of the amended Law on the Justice Academy, the HSYK provided in-
service training to judges and prosecutors, mainly in cooperation with the Justice Academy. It
performed a ‘training needs assessment’, published training courses on its website and in the
National Judicial Network and took part in conferences, workshops and symposia. In
cooperation with the Justice Academy, the HSYK continued to build up a network of trainers
and speakers. A strategy has to be developed, in cooperation with relevant stakeholders, to

                                                45
 support the systematic training of all legal practitioners and increase the Justice Academy’s
capacity to perform their training. There is a need for the Justice Academy, the High Council
of Judges and Prosecutors, the Ministry of Justice, Turkish Union of Bar Associations and the
Union of Turkish Notaries to establish protocols to support common training for legal
practitioners.
Implementation of the fourth judicial reform package led to an improvement on access to
justice, in that the package loosened the conditions for granting legal aid and introduced the
possibility of holding hearings to decide on the granting of such aid. The Ministry of Justice,
Bar Associations and civil society organisations provided information on legal matters and on
relevant procedures. The amount allocated in 2013 for legal aid services and compulsory
advocate fees were increased (approximately € 93 million).
There was no adoption of an overall strategy on legal aid or further revision of the current
system. Measures still need to be taken to increase and monitor the scope and quality of legal
aid. Legal aid fees continued to be unattractively low for experienced lawyers. Public
awareness of legal aid in rural areas and among disadvantaged groups remained limited. Low
literacy rates aggravated the problem. This — combined with a low level of gender equality-
awareness among law enforcement officials, members of the judiciary and public officials —
increased the obstacles that women faced in accessing justice and legal services.
Anti-corruption policy
Corruption was a significant part of the political debate in Turkey, due in particular to the
anti-corruption investigations launched in December 2013. Four ministers, relatives of
Cabinet members and various other public officials and businessmen were targeted by
allegations of corruption. Several suspects were charged with bribery, tender-rigging, export
fraud or misuse of state-owned land in real estate deals and various other charges (see
Political criteria — Government).
The authorities’ reacted harshly, denouncing an allegedly attempted judicial coup and proof of
the existence of a ‘parallel structure’ within state institutions. The prosecutors and police
officers in charge of the investigations were removed from office, and some of them were
themselves investigated for corruption. Legislative amendments weakening the independence
of the judiciary (subsequently partially struck down by the Constitutional Court and Council
of State) and changes to the criminal legislation reducing the efficiency of the criminal justice
system were adopted (see above — Judicial system).
Under the 2010-14 national anti-corruption strategy, numerous working groups, set up to
consider various corruption-related issues, reported to an inter-ministerial committee
overseeing implementation. Reports were not made public and there were very limited
opportunities for contributions from civil society organisations. Some practical policy
suggestions were made by the working groups, such as conducting annual country-wide
corruption perception surveys and establishing comprehensive tracking of data on corruption.
These have not been implemented. The legal mandate, institutional capacity and functional
independence of the Prime Ministry Inspection Board remained unclear. It is currently entitled
only to oversee work related to the strategy and has a mandate for coordination via bylaw
alone. Turkey has not responded to GRECO’s recommendations.
There continued to be insufficient control over and verification of assets declared by elected
public officials, appointed public officials and political figures. In line with art 20 of the
United Nations’ Convention Against Corruption, Turkey should consider criminalising illicit
enrichment. No changes were made on the immunity of Members of Parliament and certain
public officials regarding corruption-related offences. The Council of Ethics for Public
Servants had no power to enforce their decisions with disciplinary measures. Codes of ethics
do not exist for military personnel or academics. Legal loopholes (disclosing gifts, financial

                                               46
 interests and shares, foreign travel paid for by outside sources, etc.) in the code of ethics for
parliamentarians remained.
As regards external audit, accountability for budgetary issues was hampered by shortcomings
in the legal framework of the Law on the Court of Accounts and associated parliamentary
scrutiny. The parliamentary follow-up to audit reports needs to be improved by setting up
committees with the technical expertise to analyse the reports. Some institutions that provided
services in the name of metropolitan municipalities (e.g. the Tax Settlement Board and
municipality-owned private companies) were exempt from the Court of Accounts’ ex post
audit and posed a risk for corruption.
The Deniz Feneri alleged corruption case continued, following the removal of the initial
prosecution team from the case, but with amended charges that did not refer to organised
criminal activity.
Fundamental rights
With regard to international human rights instruments Turkey has to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the additional Protocols 4, 7 and 12
to the European Convention on Human Rights. In November, Turkey signed Additional
Protocol 16 to the European Convention on Human Rights.
During the reporting period, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) delivered 122
judgments on 153 applications, finding that Turkey had violated rights guaranteed by the
ECHR in 113 cases. The number of new applications went sharply down, with 1 950 new
applications having been made since September 2013 compared with the 5 919 applications
submitted in the period September 2012 — September 2013. Most concern the right to a fair
trial and protection of property rights. As of September 2014, 10 280 applications regarding
Turkey were pending at the ECtHR, down from 13 900 applications in September 2013. The
decrease in the number of applications is a result of passed reforms in particular the
introduction of new domestic remedies such as the Human Rights Compensation Commission
which saw the scope of its jurisdiction expanded in February 2014.
The ‘Action Plan for the Prevention of Violations of the European Convention on Human
Rights’, adopted in March, represent a significant step towards bringing Turkey’s legal
framework in line with ECtHR case-law. The Plan covers 14 main areas of human rights,
including key areas like preventing violation of the right to life, preventing of ill-treatment,
ensuring effective access to courts, ensuring a trial within reasonable time, freedom of
expression and media, as well as freedom of assembly. Civil society was not involved in the
drafting of the Action Plan. An overall fundamental rights action plan is still needed. The EU
has called on Turkey to enhance its efforts to implement all the judgments of the European
Court of Human Rights.
In the Cyprus v. Turkey case, the issues of missing persons and restrictions on the property
rights of Greek Cypriots displaced or living permanently in the northern part of Cyprus
remain pending. On 12 May 2014 the Court of Human Rights delivered a Grand Chamber
Decision on the question of just satisfaction in the case Cyprus v. Turkey and awarded
compensation for non-pecuniary damage to the relatives of the missing persons and for
restrictions on the property rights of the enclaved Greek Cypriot residents of the Karpas
peninsula. The Court ruled that its decision in Demopoulos v. Turkey of 5 March 2010 does
not dispose of the question of Turkey’s compliance with the provisions of the principal
judgment concerning the right of displaced persons to respect for their home and property.
Following Demopoulos v. Turkey, 5 942 applications from Greek Cypriot owners have been
lodged with the Immovable Property Commission (IPC), 528 of them during the period 1
October 2013 – 31 May 2014. By August 2014, around 708 cases had been closed, mainly
with friendly settlements, and the IPC paid the equivalent of € 221 076 945 in compensation.

                                               47
 In a number of other cases, including Xenides-Arestis v. Turkey, Demades v. Turkey, and
Varnava and others v. Turkey, Turkey has to fully execute the decision.
Turkey adopted measures on the promotion and enforcement of human rights that were set
out in the 30 September 2013 democratisation package and created a Turkish version of the
ECtHR judgments database. The Department of Human Rights in the Ministry of Justice
published translations of relevant ECtHR judgments on its website.
The implementation of the January 2013 law setting up a board within the Ministry of Justice
for compensation in cases of excessively lengthy proceedings has been effective in settling a
large number of cases in a reasonable timeframe.
In January, the National Human Rights Institution (NHRI) was assigned the role of the
national preventive mechanism (NPM) under the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
Convention on Prevention of Torture (see below — prevention of torture and ill-treatment).
Following the NHRI’s functional establishment in January 2013, the institution prepared
implementing regulations on receiving violation applications and organised consultations with
the public administration and civil society. The NHRI published reports on the mass graves of
missing persons (the ‘Siverek Enquiry Report’) and on conditions in the Metris juvenile
prison. There is a need to make the NHRI more independent and to ensure adequate
employment of human rights experts, as well as to provide these experts with legal protection
in the conduct of their duties. The future of the provincial and sub-provincial Human Rights
Boards and their administrative relationship with the NHRI needs to be clarified. The NHRI
also needs to increase its work to promote awareness among stakeholders and civil society of
human rights issues and the institution’s activities.
A specific body to combat racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism and intolerance has to be
established. No developments took place on adopting legislation to establish an Anti-
discrimination and Equality Board.
The Ombudsman Institution continued receiving complaints and some of his
recommendations made reference to relevant ECtHR case-law (see Political criteria —
Ombudsman).
Parliament’s Human Rights Inquiry Committee was active on number of issues, such as
deaths of illegal migrants, poor prison conditions and the situation of the Syrian refugees. The
committee invited number of institutions to report on these issues.
There are at least 15 ongoing individual criminal proceedings and as many ongoing
investigations against human rights defenders— mostly under anti-terrorism legislation and
the Law on Demonstrations and Marches. Some human rights defenders were released
following the adoption of a law in February that reduced the maximum pre-trial detention
period from ten to five years. In June, the Court of Cassation quashed the aggravated life
imprisonment sentence against sociologist and human rights defender Pınar Selek and
returned the case to the lower court which, in October, abided with the Court of Cassation
ruling and lifted the arrest warrant. The case, which has been going on for 16 years,
underlines the importance to respect the right to a fair trial within a reasonable period of time,
enshrined in the European Convention of Human Rights.
The government continued its work to ensure compliance with legal safeguards for the
prevention of torture and ill-treatment. The downward trend in the incidence and severity
of ill-treatment in official detention continued. However, the frequent use of excessive force
during demonstrations and arrests remains a matter of concern.
In a report published in November, the Council of Europe Human Rights Commissioner
criticised the Law on Powers and Duties of the Police, noting that it allows the dispersal of
any demonstration which has been deemed unlawful, without taking into account whether or

                                               48
 not it is peaceful. The report stated that legislation imposes undue or disproportionate
punishment for participation in unlawful demonstrations. The Commissioner called for more
transparency and dialogue between police and organisers of demonstrations, and for the
adoption of clear and binding rules on the proportionate use of force regarding
demonstrations, in line with the relevant Committee for the Prevention of Torture
recommendations and ECtHR case-law.
Two circulars issued in 2013 by the Ministry of the Interior, governing the use of tear gas and
pepper spray by the police, were not implemented consistently. The ECtHR has previously
criticised Turkey for heavy-handed intervention of law enforcement officers during
demonstrations, including use of tear gas and pepper spray (Ataman v. Turkey group of cases).
The ECtHR found Turkey in violation of Article 2 ECHR (the right to life) in the Makbule
Kaymaz and Others v. Turkey, and Benzer and Others v. Turkey cases.
Parliament’s Human Rights Inquiry Committee started monitoring ill-treatment during
military service. Instances of ill-treatment of conscripts continued to be reported.
The National Preventive Mechanism was set up within the National Human Rights Institution.
This was criticised by human rights organisations, which cited the requirement for the NPM
to be independent of the executive.
As regards the fight against impunity, in November, the Court of Cassation upheld the
convictions of 11 public officials, following the death in custody of Engin Çeber in 2008. A
prison director and two prison guards received life sentences.
Investigations into the authorities’ handling of the 2013 Gezi protests, which resulted in the
death of seven protestors and a police officer, were hampered by a loss of evidence (in the Ali
İsmail Korkmaz case), obstruction — including counter claims launched against protestors —
and reportedly refusal to investigate claims of sexual harassment. During the ongoing court
case on the deaths of protestors during the Gezi protests, one of the two police officers
accused of causing the deaths remained on active duty. In total 329 investigations into
disproportionate use of force during Gezi events were launched. Most of them are still
pending. In September one police officer was sentenced to 7 years and 9 months in prison for
shooting dead a protestor. The sentence was issued in the first instance and is pending an
appeal. Independent, prompt and effective investigations into all allegations need to be
ensured.
Law enforcement bodies continued to launch counter-cases against those alleging torture or
ill-treatment. In many instances, these counter-cases were given priority by the courts.
However, the absence of prompt, thorough, independent and effective investigations into all
allegations of torture by law enforcement officers remained a concern. Law enforcement
officers found guilty of torture, ill-treatment or fatal shootings continued to receive short or
suspended sentences. An independent Law Enforcement Monitoring Commission has to be
set up.
A number of trials relating to allegations of ill-treatment of conscientious objectors in military
prisons continued.
There was no comprehensive approach to missing persons or the exhumation of mass graves
and thorough and independent investigations of all alleged cases of extrajudicial killings by
security and law enforcement officers were also lacking. Mass graves discovered in the south-
east were not adequately investigated.
Reform of the prison system continued. As of August 1 612 prison staff members received
training on European and international rules and standards and 3 248 additional staff were
recruited. A shortage of probation officers remained an issue.


                                               49
 The government constructed 10 new prisons; however, overcrowding remained a concern in
many of them. There were reports on significant number of transfers of inmates, mainly from
the east and south-east of Turkey to other provinces. This has an impact on the inmates’
capacity to access justice and on their family contacts. There were a number of reported cases
of ill-treatment in juvenile prisons.
Standards for monitoring prisons were not harmonised with UN Prison Rules. Prison
Monitoring Boards did not have sufficient resources, training or expertise to carry out their
work effectively. Their reports on allegations of inhumane prison conditions were not made
public. Civil society organisations were not allowed to monitor prisons.
The NHRI visited prisons with the intention of reporting on conditions. In a report published
in May, it outlined number of recommendations to modify the legal framework and its
implementation with regard to ensure improved prison conditions. Parliamentary Human
Rights Inquiry Committee members held inquiries at F-type, juvenile and youth prisons and at
hospital wards for inmates and detainees. Some of these inquiries were held as a result of
complaints, while others took place at the initiative of committee members.
Implementation of the 2011 tripartite protocol between the Ministries of Health, Justice and
the Interior was uneven. This protocol stated that law enforcement officers should not be
present during medical examinations of prisoners.
Following a March 2013 ECtHR judgment on the failure of the State to accord an inmate
proper access to health services in prison prior to her death from cancer in 2001, the number
of ill prisoners released on compassionate grounds increased. At the end of 2013, however, a
large number of gravely ill prisoners remained in custody. There is a need to streamline the
establishment of expert reports, and the administrative and judicial decision-making process
for the release of prisoners on compassionate grounds.
The September 2013 ECtHR ruling (Söyler v. Turkey case) stated that Turkey had violated the
right to free elections, finding in particular that bans on convicted prisoners’ voting rights did
not take into account the nature or gravity of the offence, the length of the prison sentence or
the prisoner’s individual conduct or circumstances. This did not lead to changes in Turkish
legislation.
In December, a subcommittee of the parliamentary Human Rights Inquiry Committee issued a
report criticising conditions in several prisons.
As regards freedom of expression, debate on sensitive matters such as the Kurdish and the
Armenian issues was open and lively. The ‘Action Plan for the Prevention of Violations of the
European Convention on Human Rights’ (see above — Judicial system) envisages revision of
some provisions of the Turkish Criminal Code that restrict freedom of expression and
freedom of the press in the areas where the ECtHR found Turkey to be in violation of the
European Convention on Human Rights. The Action Plan, however, does not envisage
revision of all relevant provisions of the Anti-Terror Law or of the Criminal Code that have
been used to limit freedom of expression.
With the reduction of the maximum period of pre-trial detention from ten to five years, a
number of journalists were released pending trial. However, according to the OSCE statistics
as of June 2014, there were 22 journalists in prison. Since then one more was released. Turkey
remains among countries with the most journalists in prison. The government claims that
there are no journalists in prison as a result of articles written or speeches made.
The implementation of the fourth Judicial Reform Package led to improved legal framework
with regard to respect of freedom of expression in Turkey. The Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe, in its decision of 5 June 2014, found that legislative amendments made to


                                               50
 the Anti-terror Law and the Criminal Code responded to violations found by the ECtHR in the
Incal group of cases.
A number of provisions still need to be amended, such as Article 314 of the Criminal Code,
on membership of an armed organisation. This article was used to prosecute left-wing or
Kurdish journalists. Cases continued against writers, lawyers, academics, students and
journalists writing and working on the Kurdish issue.
Implementation of two ECtHR judgments on Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code,
which criminalises the act of insulting the Turkish nation, remains pending. The Action Plan
envisages revising this article. In 2013, the number of cases referred the Minister of Justice
was 373, while number of investigation authorisation was granted to 40 of those cases. In the
first semester of 2014 total of cases referred was 228, out of which the investigation
authorisation was granted to 14 of them.
A restrictive interpretation by the judiciary of Article 216 of the Turkish Criminal Code, on
provoking the public to hatred and hostility, continued, especially when directed against non-
Muslim communities, often ending up in non-prosecution decisions.
In May the Constitutional Court found for the first time that hate speech on the ground of
sexual orientation constituted a criminal offence.
Statements by state officials had an intimidating effect on media and press and led to
investigations by public prosecutors, i.a. against editors and journalists. Moreover, state
officials themselves continued to launch court cases against journalists and writers, some of
them ending with prison sentences. This, together with numerous dismissals of journalists, as
well as the high concentration of media ownership in the hands of business conglomerates
with interests going far beyond the free circulation of information, continued to lead to
widespread self-censorship by media owners and journalists, including on issues of public
interest, such as corruptions allegations. The fact that the government is responsible for
issuing a press card, granting the status of an accredited journalist, and the excessively strict
requirements to obtain it — excluding categories of people who may otherwise fit the
description, including young journalists, freelancers and the online media — contribute to
self-censorship.
The polarisation of society and the media prevents self-regulation, establishing common rules
for professional ethics, and professional solidarity through setting up trade unions.
The new law on the Turkish intelligence service, adopted in April, contained provisions for
prison sentences of up to 9 years for journalists, editors and others who publish classified
intelligence.
Website bans of disproportionate scope and duration continued. In August, it was reported
that more than 50 000 sites were not accessible in Turkey, only 6 000 of which had been
banned by court order. The Telecommunications Communication Presidency (TIB) has not
published statistics on banned sites since May 2009. The law on the internet was amended in
February, March and September, in a hasty manner and without consultations with relevant
stakeholders. These amendments introduced the concept of proportional website bans and
eliminated prison sentences for hosting service providers and access providers. Nevertheless,
the law has the potential to further restrict freedom of expression through giving the TIB
excessive powers, and needs to be revised in line with European standards. In March, the TIB
banned access to Twitter and YouTube. The Turkish Constitutional Court found that both of
these bans violated freedoms guaranteed by the country’s constitution. This led the TIB to
restore access to both Twitter and YouTube. The Constitutional Court also found that the
legal basis of the scope and boundaries of the authority vested on TIB to impose an access ban
does not satisfy the requirement that the law should be comprehensible, clear and accurate,
which is the minimum condition for the principle of legality. In October 2014, the

                                               51
 Constitutional Court annulled provisions which had been introduced in September in the law
on the internet and which, notably, had extended TIB’s powers regarding blocking of websites
and retention of data.
The Supreme Board of Radio and Television (RTÜK) issued warnings to the public
broadcaster TRT for disproportionate coverage of the governing AKP party during the March
local elections. Before the local elections, the RTÜK issued warnings to and fined a number
of television stations (both pro-government and pro-opposition), claiming that they were
violating the principle of objective broadcasting. The RTÜK issued warnings to and fined
television and radio stations for ‘broadcasting superstitious beliefs’, ‘denigrating morals and
national values’, ‘damaging the family’ and ‘broadcasting obscenity’. Since December 2013,
the RTÜK issued warnings to and fined several TV channels that reported on government-
related corruption allegations. In its preliminary report, the joint OSCE-Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe election observation mission of the presidential elections
noted that three out of five monitored TV stations, including the public broadcaster, displayed
a significant bias towards the Prime Minister — presidential candidate. In particular, live
broadcasting of his events and speeches gave him a distinctive advantage.
Following amendments to the Higher Education Council’s disciplinary regulation, a new
provision was introduced restricting academics’ statements to news, radio and television
agencies only to subjects of scientific debate.
The overall approach to arts and culture was marked by steps increasing the state supervision,
including by introducing requirement of ‘morally acceptable’ theatre plays as a condition for a
state financial support or a ministerial approval of movies to be screened at national film
festivals.
As regards freedom of assembly, the Constitution recognises the right of citizens to assemble
and demonstrate without having to obtain any prior authorisation, but the legislation provides
an ample margin of appreciation to the authorities and significantly restricts this freedom in
practice. In March, amendments to the law extended the time periods within which
demonstrations may be held and provided that the authorities would consult stakeholders on
the venue and route for demonstrations and on monitoring and terminating demonstrations.
The amendments also provided for the recording of all demonstrations, with the possibility of
using these recordings to identify suspects and as criminal evidence.
Turkish legislation and its implementation concerning the right of assembly and regarding
intervention by law enforcement officers are still to be brought in line with European
standards. The peacefulness of a rally is not used as the basic criterion for the use of force to
disperse participants; this is not in line with ECtHR case-law. Recurrent and structural
problems in policing demonstrations are widely documented in the more than 40 ECtHR
judgments against Turkey and the more than 100 pending applications. The June and July
2013 Ministry of the Interior circulars on the use of tear gas by riot police — a matter for
which Turkey has been criticised by the ECtHR (Abdullah Yaşa and Others v. Turkey case)
— and on courses of action in cases of social unrest were applied inconsistently.
The March 2014 Action Plan for the Prevention of Violations of the European Convention on
Human Rights provided that the Law on Demonstrations and Marches would be revised in
line with ECtHR jurisprudence in the short term and also provided for training for security
forces on ECtHR jurisprudence.
Kurdish Newroz celebrations took place peacefully. No action was taken in response to
speeches made in Kurdish, signalling the further normalisation of the use of Kurdish in
public. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) pride parades went ahead
without disruption in major cities, with the right to assembly being respected.


                                               52
 However, on numerous occasions, demonstrations critical of government policies were
subject to excessive use of force by the police. Force was used to break up numerous Kurdish-
related gatherings in the south-east, protests relating to Gezi events, as well demonstrations in
Taksim Square in Istanbul. A workers’ rally following the Soma mine disaster was violently
dispersed by the police.
Civil society organisations reported that they were prevented from holding meetings and
rallies on several occasions, and that they were issued fines. A number of human rights
defenders continued facing legal proceedings on charges of breaking the law and of making
propaganda for terrorism as a result of their presence at demonstrations and meetings and
following their attendance at press conferences. For the second consecutive year the 1 May
march in Taksim Square was not allowed.
Concepts such as ‘general morality’, ‘Turkish family structure’, ‘national security’, and
‘public order’ were used widely and allowed too large a margin of discretion to authorities,
hindering the respect in practice of freedom of association. Two LGBTI associations faced
closure requests based on ‘general morality’. Court cases are pending regarding the closure of
five associations dealing with human rights, and Kurdish issues in particular. Discriminatory
practice was reported regarding the frequency, duration and scope of audits for rights-based
associations.
One international NGO has been waiting six years for its registration, and another has an
ongoing court case. A number of other international NGOs wishing to provide assistance to
Syrian refugees in Turkey or in Syria found their work blocked for reasons unclear to them. In
September 2013, a temporary registration status was introduced and applied to just three
international NGOs.
Legislative and bureaucratic obstacles hindered the financial sustainability of civil society
organisations. There were complaints of discrimination against associations applying for
public benefit status and permission to raise funds. Receiving public benefit status (for
associations) or tax-exempt status (for foundations) was complicated by the need for the
decision to be taken by the Council of Ministers. The total number of organisations having
such status amounted to less than 1 % of all civil society organisations. Value added tax
(VAT) exemption procedures for rights-based NGOs remained burdensome. The collection of
domestic and international funds was difficult and bureaucratic procedures were cumbersome.
Organisations received permission to collect funds for only monthly or quarterly periods each
time and the criteria to obtain this permission were not clear.
Cases based on terrorism legislation charges lodged against the confederations of trade unions
KESK (Confederation of Public Workers Unions) and DISK (Confederation of Progressive
Trade Unions) and associated trade unions continued. Court cases also continued against
many trade unions and their representatives (see below — labour and trade union rights).
Concerning freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of worship continued to
be generally respected. Implementation of the 2011 legislation amending the 2008 Law on
Foundations continued, with properties being returned or compensation paid (see below —
property rights).
The March 2014 Action Plan for the Prevention of Violations of the European Convention on
Human Rights provides for an impact assessment of the changes introduced to curriculum of
the religious culture and for ethics classes. However, the European Court of Human Rights’
2007 Hasan and Eylem Zengin v. Turkey judgment remains to be implemented. In September
in the case Mansur Yalçınand and Others v. Turkey the ECtHR found violation of Article 2 of
Protocol 1 (right to education) of the ECHR and held that Turkey had to remedy the situation
without delay, in particular by introducing a system whereby pupils could be exempted from


                                               53
 religion and ethics classes without their parents having to disclose their own religious or
philosophical convictions.
Non-Muslim communities — as organised religious groups — continued to face problems as
a result of their lack of legal personality, with adverse effects on their property rights, access
to justice, fundraising and the ability of foreign clergy to obtain residence and work permits.
In this respect, the relevant 2010 recommendations by the Council of Europe’s Venice
Commission need to be implemented. The Ecumenical Patriarchate received no indication
from the authorities that it may use the ‘ecumenical’ title freely. The Venice Commission’s
conclusion in 2010 that any interference with this right would constitute a violation of the
autonomy of the Orthodox Church under Article 9 of the European Convention on Human
Rights needs to be implemented.
Restrictions on the training of clergy continued. Neither Turkish legislation nor the public
education system provide for higher religious education for individual religious communities.
Despite previous encouraging announcements by the authorities, the Halki (Heybeliada)
Greek Orthodox seminary remains closed since 1971. The Armenian Patriarchate’s proposal
to open a university department for the Armenian language and Armenian clergy remained
pending. With the exception of one case, the Syriac Orthodox community was only able to
provide informal training outside official schools.
Personal documents such as identity cards continued to include information on religion. The
2010 Sinan Işık v. Turkey ECtHR ruling which states that indicating religious affiliation on
identity cards is in breach of the Convention still has to be implemented. Implementation of
the May 2010 Prime Ministerial circular instructing relevant authorities to pay due attention
to the problems of non-Muslim Turkish citizens remained inconsistent.
No concrete steps have been taken to address problems of the Alevi community. Cem houses
were not officially recognised as places of worship and Alevis experienced difficulties in
establishing new places of worship. The Presidency of Religious Affairs (Diyanet) expressed
the view that mosques are the only place of worship in Islam. Some Alevi organisations were
consulted on preparations for Ministry of National Education textbooks for compulsory
religious culture and ethics classes. However, a number of these organisations regretted that
the end result did not meet their expectations.
Alevi community expressed discontent about the naming of the third bridge over the
Bosphorus after Sultan Selim I, considered to be responsible for killing thousands of Alevis.
The case on closing Çankaya Cem House Construction Association remained pending before
the Court of Cassation. Judicial investigations continued after Alevi citizens’ houses were
vandalised in a number of provinces in 2013 with the new incidents occurred in December
2013.
Two cases regarding Jehovah’s Witnesses’ Kingdom Halls were pending before the ECtHR.
In June the European Court of Human Rights found Turkey in violation of Art. 3 (prohibition
of torture) and of Art. 9 (freedom of thought, conscience and religion) of the ECHR for
prosecuting and sentencing four Jehovah’s Witnesses who refused compulsory military
service.
The court case concerning the killing of three Protestants in Malatya in April 2007 continued
(see below — minorities). The Protestant community reported that individual hate crimes
directed at Christians continued in 2013, with physical attacks being carried out against
individuals and churches.
In November a government official stated that the Hagia Sophia Museum in Istanbul should
be converted into a mosque. In November, MHP submitted a proposal to this effect. A court
case launched in Trabzon in 2013 by a number of civil society representatives against the
turning of Hagia Sophia into a mosque continued.

                                               54
 The minority representative on the Foundations Council in the Directorate General for
Foundations resigned over the lack of a legal framework allowing religious foundations to
elect their management boards. Although he later withdrew his resignation, the issue over
which he resigned was not resolved.
As regards conscientious objection, several ECtHR judgments have to be implemented. The
issue of conscientious objection is not covered in the March Action Plan. Turkey is the only
member of the Council of Europe that does not recognise the right to conscientious objection
for conscripts.
As regards women’s rights and gender equality, implementation of the March 2012 Law on
the Protection of Family and Prevention of Violence against Women, which also provided for
preventive imprisonment measures against violent partners, continued. There was criticism
about the effectiveness of its implementation, the clarity of some provisions and the adequacy
in numbers, competences and training of staff dealing with domestic violence. Work also
continued to implement the Ministry for Family and Social Policies’ 2012-15 national action
plan to combat violence against women. Civil society organisations regretted the lack of
indicators, objectives, a monitoring system or funds allocated for activities. Violence
Prevention Centres were established in 2 additional pilot cities, 14 in total. A regulation on
their operation had to be issued, staff appointments were not completed and appointed staff
not trained.
Under current legislation, each metropolitan municipality and each municipality with a
population of over 100 000 must have a shelter for women victims of domestic violence.
There were a total of 123 shelters for women, with a capacity of 2 190 places; 90 shelters were
operated by the government, 32 by municipalities and 1 by an NGO. Women’s NGOs
interested in opening such shelters stated that they did not do so due to lack of financial
support. There were no clear follow-up mechanisms for municipalities who failed to establish
shelters for women who were victims of domestic violence.
Cases of women under judicial protection being killed have been reported, thereby
questioning the effectiveness of the relevant legislation and its implementation. Violence
against women, including honour killings and early and forced marriages, remained an issue.
There are no official statistics on instances of violence against women, including killings and
early and forced marriages. The head of the Female Lawyers’ Commission of the Union of
Turkish Bar Associations stated that there was a 94 % increase in applications to courts by
families to receive marriage permits.
Societal acceptance of domestic abuse in some cases contributed to underreporting of gender-
based violence. There were reports of sexual harassment during rallies, in police custody and
police vehicles. ‘Consent’, ‘undue provocation’ and ‘appearing older’ were used to justify a
reduction in sentences for sex crimes while the Forensic Medicine Institute was criticised for
delays in finalising reports on sex crimes. Implementation of the ECtHR judgment in the
Opuz v. Turkey case relating to effective judicial decisions with preventive or deterrent effect
for offenders is still pending.
With regard to the gender equality, the participation of women in the labour force increased
marginally but remained low, at 33.2 % (Eurostat, 2013). Shortcomings were reported in
implementing the circular on increasing women’s employment and equal opportunities.
Gender-based segregation of domestic duties and inadequate childcare services or services for
older people limits women’s access to the labour market. With regard to employment as
unpaid family worker, there is a significant gap between women and men, and full
enforcement of principle of equal pay for equal value of work needs to be stepped up.
The number of female candidates in the March local elections increased for all main political
parties. Three metropolitan mayor posts are now held by women. The BDP brought in a co-

                                              55
 chair system in municipalities where it won the vote, so that each of these municipalities has a
woman co-mayor. However, women’s political representation remains low. No legislative
changes were introduced to promote women’s inclusion, representation and participation in
politics. Women were underrepresented in decision-making positions in the public sector
while improvements were reported in the private sector.
The parliamentary committee on equal opportunities between men and women issued 9
opinions on draft legislation. Law enforcement personnel, health professionals, social workers
and teachers received some training on gender equality. No amendments were made to
Turkish legislation that forbids a woman from exclusively using her maiden name after
marriage, despite an ECtHR ruling to this effect. In January, the Constitutional Court also
ruled that married women could exclusively use their maiden name.
Concerning children’s rights, a 2013-17 National Strategy Document and Action Plan on
Rights of the Children was approved on 10 December 2013. The Strategy sets out the general
framework and outlines actions for promoting services for children in numerous fields such as
justice, health, education, private protection services and media. The National Action Plan on
Combatting Child Violence (2014-18) is being prepared. The enrolment rate in pre-school
education institutions was around 37 % among four- and five-year-olds. Administrative
capacity continued to increase; however, pre-school education and care opportunities were
uneven across the country.
Enrolment rates for primary education exceeded 99.6 %. Upper secondary school enrolment
rates reached 76.7 %, an increase of around 6 %, due in part to a greater use of distance
education, while the gender gap decreased from 1.5 % to 1.2 %. Absenteeism and school drop-
out rates at all levels of education were not officially published but were reportedly high.
Regional disparities across the country in accessing education remained high. Children with
disabilities and special learning needs, children from seasonal agricultural migrant families
and Roma children faced particular difficulties in accessing education.
With regard to child labour, it was reported that 71 children died in workplace accidents in
2013.
Child poverty, particularly in the rural and eastern regions remains at high levels. According
to Turkish data, nearly one quarter of children suffers from basic material deprivation
(nutrition, clothing, heating). The conditional cash aid system was insufficient to address
child poverty.
The Monitoring and Assessment Board for the rights of the child, tasked with coordinating
the implementation and monitoring of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, did not
meet during the reporting period. Coordination between ministries, departments and state
institutions dealing with children’s rights was inadequate at national, regional and local levels.
Infant mortality rates and rates of communicable diseases decreased. The preliminary results
of the 2013 Demographic Health Survey show a decline of 23 % of infant mortality within the
last five years and the vaccination coverage was above 95 % for eleven antigens. The
education system offered little information on sexual and reproductive health issues. Corporal
punishment was not explicitly prohibited at home or in psychiatric facilities and rehabilitation
centres. The national children’s rights monitoring system lacked an effective complaint and
reporting mechanism.
Thirty-one judicial meeting rooms were built for juveniles in 22 provinces. Out of 18 serious
crimes courts for juveniles, 9 were operational. Despite the requirement in the Child
Protection Law that juvenile courts should be established in all provinces the total number of
juvenile courts was 100, of which 84 were operational. In provinces where juvenile courts did
not exist, children were tried in ordinary courts for adults.


                                               56
 As of May 2014, 1 649 children aged between 12 and 18 were in prison, of which around 487
had been convicted.
Juvenile prison conditions varied; there were complaints of overcrowding, inadequate
hygiene, ill-treatment, staff shortages and violence and/or abuse by inmates. The case
concerning allegations of ill-treatment and sexual harassment in Pozantı, Adana prison
remained pending. Transferred children were not able to maintain frequent contact with their
families.
In February 2014, legislation was adopted to improve the situation of the socially vulnerable
and/or persons with disabilities. The principle of non-discrimination on the basis of
disability is now explicitly mentioned in national education legislation and labour laws. The
new provisions redefined the concept of accessibility in line with UN Convention on the
Rights of people with Disabilities, and provisions on direct and indirect discrimination on the
basis of disability were aligned as well with that UN Convention. The principle of
accessibility in urban environments, public transport services, electronic services and
emergency services has now an improved definition in line with the acquis. Disability
consultation and coordination centres need to be established within higher education
institutions. The new legislation extended support for protected workplaces for people with
disabilities, and salaries for employees with disabilities working in such workplaces are to be
subsidised by the Treasury.
Public schools have an obligation to accommodate students with disabilities. In general, the
number and ratio of students with disabilities declined sharply from primary school through to
university. The inclusive vocational and lifelong learning opportunities remained limited and
41 % of persons with disabilities are illiterate, which points to insufficient access facilities.
Discriminatory practices have been observed in employing public servants with disabilities,
despite an increase in their employment in recent years. The proportion of employees with
disabilities is low in a large number of positions, including senior government officials. There
are legal provisions limiting the entry of people with disabilities to the professions of judge or
prosecutor.
Work continued on implementing the strategy paper and the national action plan on
accessibility. However, the inaccessibility of public buildings and transport services remained
an issue. There was no clear follow-up system for non-compliance with UN standards.
Some progress was achieved on the transition to community-based services. Home-based care
services for people with disabilities and older people increased. Several community mental
health centres were established, providing outpatient treatment and decreasing the number of
involuntary hospitalisations. The Ministry of Family and Social Policies opened ‘hope
houses’, where people with psycho-social disabilities can live within a community.
Turkey has no specific mental health law and there is no independent body to monitor and
inspect mental health institutions.
The Turkish Criminal Code regulates anti-discrimination, listing language, race, colour,
gender, disability, political opinion, philosophical belief, religion, sect and similar reasons as
bases on which discrimination is not permitted. It was amended to refer to hate crimes and to
increase penalties for discrimination. Refusing to sell or rent a movable or immovable
property to a particular person, while this has been offered to the public, is considered
discrimination and has become a crime. However, discrimination on the basis of ethnic origin,
sexual orientation and gender identity were not listed in the March revision of the Criminal
Code. This affects especially important minorities as Roma and Kurds that are the most
disadvantaged groups.



                                               57
 A draft law on the establishment of an Anti-discrimination and Equality Board remained
pending at the Prime Ministry. References to discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation
or gender identity were taken out of the initial draft. Respect for the fundamental rights of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons needs to be improved.
Regarding the right to life, 4 transgender people were killed as a result of suspected hate
crimes. Court sentences for hate crime offenders were often reduced on the basis of ‘unjust
provocation’ by the victim and good behaviour. In addition, in numerous cases, crimes against
people of a different sexual orientation or gender identity remained unpunished. Shortcomings
in the investigation and prosecution of crimes were reported, as well as reluctance by LGBTI
people to file complaints.
A self-identified LGBTI person was elected to serve on a municipal council in Istanbul.
However, there were cases of discrimination at the workplace. Cases were reported of civil
servants being dismissed from their jobs due to the disclosure of their sexual identity, and
three court cases on grounds of discrimination on sexual orientation have been ongoing. A
police officer’s appeal against dismissal from his profession for his sexual orientation was
awaiting a trial date.
Transgender people faced bureaucratic difficulties after sex-change operations and
discrimination in access to health services. LGBTI sex workers faced police violence,
arbitrary administrative interventions, fines and discriminatory measures aimed at protecting
‘general morality’ and ‘general health’. A 2012 ECtHR judgment, where the court upheld a
complaint relating to sexual orientation by a gay man about the treatment he suffered while in
detention, was not implemented (X v. Turkey case).
The Turkish Armed Forces’ disciplinary system continued to define homosexuality as
‘unnatural’ and envisaged the discharge of ‘morally indecent’ personnel. The military’s
Medical Competence Regulation continued to refer to homosexuality and transsexuality as
illnesses.
Significant legislative shortcomings remained on labour and trade union rights, including
restrictive double representativeness thresholds for entering into collective bargaining, which
hinder negotiations at the appropriate level and hamper the development of unions. For public
servants, the absence of the right to strike and the ban on establishing trade unions at
professional or workplace level remained in place.
A judges’ trade union established in 2012 was officially recognised by the Ministry of
Labour. However, the exercise of labour and trade union rights remained limited, in particular
as regards the right to organise, bargain collectively and strike, for private sector employees
and civil servants. Caveats such as ‘national security’ and ‘public health’ were used
disproportionately to ban strikes. Court cases against trade unionists and police intervention in
trade union activities continued. Use of excessive force persisted against routine trade union
activities such as strikes, press announcements, protests and demonstrations that were deemed
illegal, even if non-violent in nature (see above — freedom of association). In June, a trade
union established by police officers was ordered to close and its functioning disrupted as more
than 100 of them had been sanctioned for attending the first general assembly of the union.
On property rights, work continued to implement the 2008 Law on Foundations, revised in
2011. Under this legislation, 116 minority community foundations applied for the restitution
of a total of 1 560 properties. By April, the Foundations Council approved the return of 318
properties and the payment of compensation for 21 properties. 1 092 applications were found
ineligible. Assessment of the remaining applications continued. Proper and swift
implementation of the 2011 legislation remains important.




                                               58
 The current legislation does not, however, cover foundations which have had their
management taken over by the Directorate General for Foundations, nor properties belonging
to foundations which have been transferred to third persons.
In October, the Foundations Council decided to return 12 parcels of land to Mor Gabriel
monastery. These were the subject of a Treasury court case against the monastery and their
return followed a government decision. In February, Mor Gabriel monastery received the title
deeds. The Foundations Council rejected the monastery’s demand for restitution of a further
18 parcels. Further to this, the monastery launched 18 individual administrative court cases
against the administration. Other cases regarding the monastery’s land ownership — the
administrative border demarcation case and the forestry criminal case — continued. A third
case — the main forestry case — was before the ECtHR.
Syriacs faced difficulties with property and land registration, especially in the south-east, as a
result of the cadastre registration process. A number of court cases continued, concerning both
private individuals and religious institutions. In October, members of the Syriac Catholic
community applied to the ECtHR for the return of land that belonged to the former
Patriarchate in Mardin, in south-east Turkey.
Due to Turkey’s interpretation of the Lausanne Treaty, Catholic churches have no legal
personality and no minority foundation status. As a result, a large number of properties that
belonged to the Latin Catholic Church have been confiscated by the state.
The relevant 2010 recommendations by the Venice Commission on protecting property rights
and educational rights (Council of Europe Resolution 1625 (2008)) on Gökçeada (Imvros)
and Bozcaada (Tenedos) still need to be implemented.
Problems for Greek nationals in inheriting and registering property were reported, in
particular following the Turkish authorities’ application of the amended Land Registry Law
(which limits the acquisition of property by, among others, Greek nationals), including their
interpretation of the provisions on reciprocity. In the 2009 judgment on Fokas v. Turkey, the
ECtHR ruled that the reciprocity principle was not a valid reason to deny the applicants’
entitlement to inheritance and found a violation of Article 1 of Protocol 1 (peaceful enjoyment
of possessions) of the European Convention on Human Rights. In the same case, the October
2013 judgment on just compensation ordered that financial compensation be paid to the
applicants.
Dialogue between the government and representatives of minorities continued.
In March, the Criminal Code was amended to refer to ‘hatred and discrimination’. The
amendment increased the penalty for hate offences including those based on language, race,
nationality, colour, gender, disability, political view, philosophical belief, religion or sect. The
amendment did not however include hate offences based on ethnic origin, sexual orientation
or gender identity (see above — anti-discrimination).
A regulation on election procedures for non-Muslim foundations is still not published. The
lack of this regulation prevented minority foundations from holding elections for their board
members. In March, the representative for non-Muslim minority foundations on the
Foundations Council resigned over the issue, subsequently retracting his resignation after a
deputy prime minister stated that the government would prioritise the matter.
In April, on the eve of the 99th anniversary of the events in 1915, the Prime Minister issued
the first ever message of condolence to the descendants of Armenians killed or deported. The
message was published in nine languages including Western and Eastern Armenian. In May,
the Prime Minister met the Armenian Deputy Patriarch. Initiatives to mark ‘Armenian
Genocide Commemoration Day’ took place peacefully on 24 April in Istanbul and five other


                                                59
 provinces. A ground-breaking conference on Muslim Armenians in Turkey was organised by
the Hrant Dink Foundation in November at Bosphorus University.
An exhibition entitled ‘20 Dollars, 20 Kilos’ opened on the 50th anniversary of the forced
deportation of around 45 000 Greeks from Turkey.
In December, Bosphorus University awarded the title of Doctor Honoris Causa to
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew, whose ‘Ecumenical’ title was publicly used for the first
time by a Turkish university. An ad hoc committee was established, including the Ministry of
National Education, the High Education Council and experts, chaired by the Prime Ministry
Undersecretary, to review options for the Halki (Heybeliada) Seminary. It did not publish any
report or involve or inform the Ecumenical Patriarchate. In the meantime, the Seminary
remained closed.
In July, the Constitutional Court ruled in the case concerning Hrant Dink’s murder that the
investigation had not been conducted in effective manner and that the authorities failed to
properly inform the family about conduct of the case (see above — Judiciary).
The prosecution in the case of the murder of three Christians in 2007 in Malatya continued.
Five young people arrested in April 2007 were released from pre-trial detention due to the
reduction of the maximum duration for such detention from ten to five years.
The court case regarding the April 2011 attack against the Latin Catholic Church in Adana
ended in December. Two defendants were sentenced to prison terms.
Hate rhetoric by some media targeted Christians, Armenians, Jews and to a lesser extent other
non-Muslims and Kurds. Alevis community perception is that they are subject to
discriminatory language, including by members of the government. The Protestant Churches’
report on human rights violations stated that hate crimes directed at Christians continued in
2013 and physical attacks were carried out against Protestant and other churches and
worshippers. An attack against a Greek Orthodox church in Istanbul caused material damage
to the church and to the priest’s house. There was no effective investigation or legal action
against perpetrators of similar attacks in previous years. Language attacking missionaries and
minorities remained in a number of compulsory school textbooks and in the first Diyanet five-
year plan, covering 2010-14.
Children who were not Turkish citizens continued to have the option of attending minority
schools as guest students without receiving graduation certificates. The management of
minority schools, including the accountability of both minority Heads and non-minority
Deputy Heads, remained an issue, pending an implementing regulation. The reciprocity
principle, according to which Turkey only recognises similar rights granted to Turkish
citizens by another state, continued to apply. A report noted that the preference among
minority students for studying at non-minority schools and enrolment limitations had reduced
student populations at minority schools to such extent that many had to close.
With regard to Roma, in March, a Roma Language and Culture Research Institute was
established at the University of Thrace in Edirne.
A circular from the Ministry of the Interior aiming at facilitating the registration of Roma as
citizens was adopted, however, it was estimated that a sizeable Roma population remains
unregistered. Administrative procedures for registering are claimed to be expensive and
cumbersome, requiring an application to be sent to a number of bodies.
There was a lack of quantitative data on the situation of Roma in Turkey. Reports of
discrimination continued. School drop-outs, absenteeism and child labour among Roma
children remained high. Poor housing conditions, urban transformation-related relocation
problems and difficulties in accessing health and social security services continued. Roma
women faced health risks due to early marriage and early maternity. Roma citizens continued

                                              60
 to be employed in mostly unregistered, temporary, low–paid jobs requiring low or unskilled
manual labour. According to a European Network against Racism report in March, on ‘racism
and related discriminatory practices in employment in Turkey’, the unemployment rate among
Roma people was 85 %, the highest of all groups. There were no Roma mayoral candidates in
the local elections of March 2014.
Local government in Bursa submitted a report to parliament on an attack against houses and
shops belonging to Roma people in Iznik following a murder. The report contained
discriminatory statements. A first court session was held in June regarding a civil law suit that
had been launched against 31 people in Iznik regarding their attempt to lynch Roma people.
Local authorities and representatives of Roma NGOs in Turkey took part in the European
Roma Summit held in Brussels in April 2014. Turkey has not joined the international 2005-15
‘decade of Roma inclusion’ initiative. A national Roma integration strategy is under
preparation but has not been adopted.
In December, the court case launched by Roma associations and individuals regarding the
urban renewal plan in Sulukule was upheld by the Council of State.
As regards cultural rights, the 2013 legislation allowing campaigning in languages other
than Turkish by political parties and candidates during local and parliamentary elections was
implemented without impediment in the March 2014 local elections. The use of Kurdish in
public activities even outside campaign periods was generally not penalised, thus further
normalising its use in Turkey.
In March, legislation was adopted to implement the democratisation package announced in
September 2013. This legislation allowed, among other things, the provision of private
education in the languages and dialects traditionally used in daily life. Use of non-Turkish
letters, such as X, Q and W used in Kurdish, was permitted.
The teaching of elective courses in Kurdish language in public schools continued and in the
course of 2012/2013 academic year 18 847 students were enrolled. In September the Ministry
of National Education has appointed 17 teachers of Kurdish language as permanent staff.
Mardin Artuklu University provided post-graduate education in Kurdish, and established
Arabic and Syriac language and culture departments. Muş Alpaslan and Bingöl Universities
set up Kurdish language and literature departments. In Diyarbakir Dicle University, a Kurdish
language department was established but has to become operational. Tunceli University
organised a Kurdish language course.
In November, the name of Aydınlar sub-province in Siirt was changed to Tillo. This was an
example of changing village names back to versions which preceded the 1980 military coup, a
possibility provided for in the September 2013 democratisation package and applied to
several other localities.
Work by the state Turkish Language Institution to prepare a Kurdish-Turkish and Turkish-
Kurdish dictionary continued.
Turkey still has to adopt a general law on the protection of personal data and has to set up
an independent data protection supervisory authority. Amendments to the legislation on the
National Intelligence Service and on Internet grant exceptionally wide powers to the
Intelligence Service and the Telecommunications Communication Presidency (TIB). This,
together with the absence of the legislation on protection of personal data and an independent
supervisory body, raises concerns over the lack of adequate protection of personal data in
Turkey.




                                               61
 Conclusion
Legislation adopted in the area of judiciary raised serious concerns as regards judicial
independence and impartiality, separation of powers and rule of law. These concerns
increased following the reassignments of judges, prosecutors and police working on high-
profile anti-corruption cases. The decision of the Constitutional Court quashing a number of
newly adopted provisions on the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors illustrated the
resilience of the Turkish constitutional system and brought back previous legal provisions. A
judicial reform strategy to strengthen the independence, impartiality and efficiency of the
Turkish judicial system needs to be adopted, in cooperation with all relevant stakeholders. In
addition, Turkey needs further substantial reform of its criminal justice system, including the
rules and practice related to pre-trial detentions.
As regards anti-corruption, the handling of the December 2013 corruption allegations raised
serious concerns that allegations of wrongdoing would not be addressed in a non-
discriminatory, transparent and impartial manner. No concrete steps were taken to address
deficiencies in rules governing the funding of political parties and election campaigns or the
scope of immunity for MPs. Greater political will and civil society involvement are needed if
results are to be achieved on the ground and if a track record of investigations, indictments
and convictions is to be developed. Turkey has to decide whether it will adopt an anti-
corruption strategy and action plan after 2014.
There was a mixed picture in the area of fundamental rights. The adoption in March of an
Action Plan for the Prevention of Violations of the European Convention on Human Rights
was a significant step towards aligning Turkey’s legal framework and practice with ECtHR
case-law. The number of applications before the ECtHR has decreased significantly, as a
result of the introduction of new domestic remedies such as the Human Rights Compensation
Commission. The Constitutional Court continued to apply the individual application
procedure. It took a number of key decisions strengthening the protection of fundamental
rights in Turkey. The Ombudsman Institution and the National Human Rights Institution
continued their work. However, an overall fundamental rights action plan has to be adopted.
The human rights institutional framework needs to be strengthened further and needs to
establish a track record. Legislation that further limited freedom of expression, including the
law on Internet, was adopted and the effective exercise of this freedom was restricted in
practice. The blanket bans on YouTube and Twitter were a matter of serious concern. Turkish
legislation on the right to assembly and on intervention by law enforcement officers, and their
implementation, have to be brought in line with European standards. The adoption of the data
protection legislation in line with EU standards and the establishment of an independent
supervisory body should be treated as a matter of priority. There is a need for comprehensive
reform of the legal framework on freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and the
application of this framework, to bring these into line with EU standards. Further sustained
work is needed to: guarantee women’s rights and gender equality in practice; improve
children’s rights; bring anti-discrimination legislation and practice in line with EU standards,
notably by including references to discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and sexual
identity; and guarantee cultural rights and rights of people belonging to minorities.
4.24.   Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security
With respect to migration, the Law on Foreigners and International Protection became
effective, with all of its provisions, in April 2014. On the same date, the General Directorate
for Migration Management (GDMM) officially took on responsibility for implementing the
law. The new set-up represents a substantial step towards alignment with EU standards on
international protection, treatment of regular and irregular migrants and protection of victims
of human trafficking. In 2014, a protocol was signed between the GDMM and the Turkish
National Police (TNP), to ensure a smooth transfer of tasks and responsibilities. While at

                                              62
 central level the GDMM’s structures started to operate immediately, handover across the
country will be more gradual. The GDMM will have to draft implementing legislation to
implement the new law.
Turkey is becoming an important country of destination for regular migration. At the same
time, Turkey also remains a notable transit and destination country for irregular migration. In
2013, 352 643 people were granted a temporary residence permit mainly for short stays,
family reunification, and work and education purposes. The number of apprehended irregular
migrants totalled 39 890, which represents a decrease of 16 % compared to 2012. In 2013,
22 597 irregular migrants were returned to their country of origin.
The GDMM announced that it would only take over those removal centres which are outside
the premises of the National Police. This implies that the GDMM capacity to host irregular
migrants has decreased from 1941 in 2012 to 1 740 in 2014. New centres, with a total capacity
of 3000 people, are under construction. In April 2014, the Ministry of Interior adopted a new
directive on the establishment and management of removal centres. It puts particular emphasis
on the social and psychological needs of people under administrative detention, their right to
freedom of belief and worship and their right to freedom from discrimination. However, the
directive does not make specific reference to access to legal aid or asylum procedures.
The EU and Turkey signed the readmission agreement on 16 December 2013.
Simultaneously, the visa liberalisation dialogue was launched with Turkey on the basis of a
roadmap. The EU and Turkey completed the ratification of the agreement in May and August
respectively and the agreement came into force on 1 October 2014. The Commission is
looking forward to the effective implementation of Turkey’s obligations under the
readmission agreement towards all Member States. The Commission conducted a series of
peer assessments in order to evaluate the status of Turkey’s implementation of the visa
roadmap and its benchmarks. The Commission will issue its first report on the
implementation of the roadmap on 20 October 2014.
Turkey’s bilateral readmission agreement with Moldova came into force in May 2014. The
agreement concluded by Turkey with Pakistan has not yet been ratified. There was no
progress on the implementation of the readmission agreement with Greece. In addition,
Turkey ceased to cooperate with Bulgaria on readmission.
As concerns asylum, Turkey continues to implement the Geneva Convention on Refugees of
1951 with the ‘geographical limitation’ which applies to non-European citizens. This limits
Turkey’s obligations under the Convention only to refugees originating in Europe. The new
Turkish law introduces the ‘conditional refugee’ status for non-European refugees. This gives
a high level of protection to such refugees, though lower than for refugees originating in
Europe. The Turkish law introduces further types of protection status such as ‘subsidiary
protection’ and ‘temporary protection’, but without adequate definitions. The UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which runs the refugee status determination (RSD)
procedures for resettlement in parallel with the Turkish authorities procedures, has seen its
asylum caseload almost doubled.
The Syrian crisis has led to a significant increase in the number of Syrian refugees in Turkey,
whose total number is estimated at more than 1 000 000. About 220 000 of them live in 22
well-organised, well-run refugee camps located in 10 south-eastern provinces of Turkey.
UNHCR and other international organisations provide material and technical assistance to the
Turkish authorities. Another estimated number of 700 000 Syrian refugees live mostly in
south-eastern provinces of Turkey as well as in Istanbul and Izmir. As of June 2014, Turkey
had registered — with the assistance of UNHCR — approximately 580 000 non-camp Syrian
refugees. Once registered, refugees are offered free access to health and education services.
This puts local capacity and resources under significant strain. Turkey must be praised for its
invaluable support to Syrian refugees. However, the legal status of the great majority of these
                                              63
 refugees remains unclear, which limits their employment opportunities. Refugees living
outside the camps still face considerable challenges in accessing essential services and very
often their living conditions are difficult. In addition to Syrian refugees, Turkey is hosting a
significant number of refugees from other countries, including more recently from Iraq.
On visa policy, in April, Turkey announced the introduction of new visa stickers with high
security features to replace the old, easy-to-counterfeit visa stamps. However, the new stickers
are not yet in use. In February, Turkey granted visa-free access to the citizens of only one
more Member State, Hungary. It also decided in April to grant visa exemption to ordinary
passport holders from Mongolia.
Turkey introduced a new system to obtain visas via the internet (‘e-visas’) with a view to
remove the possibility to issue visas at border crossing points and put an end to the long
queues of visa applicants at Turkey’s borders. However, so far the new system does not meet
key requirements of visa processing while visas continue to be issued at the borders. In
addition, by referring applicants from the Republic of Cyprus to the country option ‘Greek
Cypriot Administration of Southern Cyprus’, the e-visa system creates a de facto
discrimination which may also limit their mobility.
Turkey still needs to align with the EU visa requirements and exemptions and harmonise its
visa policy towards EU Member States.
In the area of external borders and Schengen, Turkey has not yet adopted a law setting up a
single border security organisation in line with the national action plan to implement Turkey’s
integrated border management strategy. Pending such a law, Turkey needs to take concrete
steps in order to improve the capacity of the agencies in charge of border management.
Recourse to conscripts for border surveillance is a matter of concern. Gendarmerie staff
numbers also need to be increased to improve the identification and processing of irregular
migrants apprehended in border regions.
Currently, none of the existing instruments and coordinating mechanisms for integrated
border management function in practice and tangible progress is required towards an
integrated border management system. To this end, effective coordination and cooperation
mechanisms among all border authorities, the gendarmerie and the GDMM are vital. It is also
necessary to develop joint working tools such as statistics, risk analysis and local strategies
leading to a shared identification of risks and counter measures. Exchange of information is
crucial to achieving this.
Cooperation between the TNP and airline operators needs to be improved especially on the
detection of false and falsified documents. Cooperation with EU immigration liaison officers
needs to be strengthened to achieve more effective border management, in particular at the
airports in Istanbul.
Turkey has taken steps to improve border cooperation with neighbouring EU Member States.
In particular, since 2013, Turkey has stepped up its cooperation with the Greek and Bulgarian
authorities on preventing irregular crossings by migrants of their common land borders. This
cooperation should be consolidated and expanded, with the establishment of a trilateral
common contact centre for law enforcement among Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey. A similar
approach is also needed on the Aegean Sea, where the number of irregular migrants passing
from Turkey to the Greek islands is increasing.
Turkey’s liability for clearing the mines under the Ottawa Convention (i.e. the Mine Ban
Treaty) has been extended until 2022. Given the challenges involved in clearing mines located
at the borders with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq and Syria, it would be advisable for
Turkey to establish a dedicated national authority to oversee the demining.



                                              64
 In February 2014, Turkey and Frontex signed a cooperation plan for the period 2014 to 2016.
Implementation of the plan began smoothly by sharing statistical data for risk analysis,
training activities and operational cooperation.
With regard to judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters, preparatory work for the
introduction of a single law on international judicial cooperation in criminal matters has been
completed. Similar work has begun on judicial cooperation in civil matters aimed at
introducing a single law in this area. In the reporting period, 164 extraditions were requested
by Turkey and twelve by EU Member States. Turkey has not yet signed a cooperation
agreement with Eurojust. However, Turkey is one of the most frequently involved third
countries in Eurojust’s casework. Turkey was invited to appoint a Eurojust contact point,
independent of the conclusion of a cooperation agreement.
Turkey signed a number of bilateral agreements on police cooperation in the fight against
crime and terrorism. The lack of a data protection law in Turkey continues to hamper police
cooperation at international level. For the same reason, an operational cooperation agreement
with Europol cannot be concluded yet although a strategic cooperation agreement was signed
in 2004. Improving liaison functions with Europol would greatly facilitate cooperation. Inter-
agency cooperation also needs to be improved. Turkey is invited to develop and introduce a
strategic threat assessment on organised crime, in line with Europol’s Serious and Organised
Crime Threat Assessment methodology (SOCTA).
Concerning the fight against organised crime the Monitoring and Assessment Board meets
regularly to implement the 2010-15 national strategy against organised crime and the 2013-15
action plan. The TNP has expanded the presence of witness protection units to three more
provinces. As part of the response of the government to the December 2013 corruption
allegations, a vast number of police officers (including high ranking officers) have been
reassigned to other positions, and in a number of cases detained. The removals have affected
operational units (e.g. anti-smuggling, organised crime, anti-terrorism) potentially
diminishing their capacity to conduct investigations. (See also Political criteria — Democracy
and the rule of law and Chapter 23— Judiciary and fundamental rights). Data collection and
analysis in the area of law enforcement needs to be improved.
Turkey ratified in May the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which it had signed
in 2010. It will enter into force on 1 January 2015. Amendments adopted in September 2014
to the legislation regulating the use of the internet, and presented as necessary for ‘national
security and protection of public order’ raised concerns as they introduced excessive
restrictions to freedom of expression (see also Chapters 10 — Information society and media,
and 23 — Judiciary and fundamental rights).
The GDMM has taken over from the TNP the coordination of the national referral mechanism
regarding trafficking in human beings and related identification tasks. The TNP will,
however, maintain an active role within the future anti-trafficking operational framework.
Turkey is not yet party to the Council of Europe Convention on Human Trafficking and has
not a comprehensive law on trafficking in line with EU standards. In 2013, the anti-trafficking
helpline recorded 87 rescue requests, mostly from Istanbul. Law enforcement authorities have
only identified a small number of victims of trafficking. Turkey’s capacity to gather and
assess information remains a weak point in the fight against trafficking in human beings.
Enhanced coordination is particularly needed.
Fighting organised crime and corruption is fundamental to countering the illicit influence of
criminal groups on the political, legal and economic systems.
With regard to the fight against terrorism, Turkey has improved its regime of countering the
financing of terrorism. As a result, the Financial Action Task Force removed Turkey from the
list of jurisdictions with strategic deficiencies in countering the financing of terrorism and

                                              65
 added it to the list of countries classed as ‘improving global anti-money laundering/countering
the financing of terrorism compliance: ongoing process’ (see Chapter 4 — Free movement of
capital). Turkey has not yet ratified the Council of Europe’s Convention on Laundering,
Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of
Terrorism.
Turkey’s active counter-terrorism dialogue with the EU has continued. However, police and
judicial cooperation with EU Member States and EU Agencies in combating terrorism is
limited because of the absence of a data protection law in Turkey and differences between
Turkey and the EU on the definition and penalties for terrorism. Turkey will need to step up
its capacity to prevent radicalisation, including developing adequate measures to address the
phenomenon of foreign fighters.
As regards cooperation in the field of drugs, Turkey has issued circulars in order to support
the implementation of the 2013-18 national strategy against drugs and the 2013-15 action
plan. Turkey remains a transit country on the drug routes between Asia and Western Europe
and Turkish criminal groups play a key role in trafficking and distributing drugs in Europe. In
2013, Turkish law enforcement bodies seized 274 380 kg of cannabis, 449 kg of cocaine,
13 480 kg of heroin and 4 441 217 ecstasy tablets. A total of 139 new psychoactive substances
have been included in the scope of the Law on Supervision of Drugs as a result of the ‘early
warning system’ working group. Although Turkey signed and ratified in 2012 the agreement
concerning its participation in the European monitoring centre for drugs and drug addiction
(EMCDDA) Turkey has not completed the official notification process, which prevents the
agreement from entering into force. Turkey reports annually to the EMCDDA and continues
to participate as an observer in the European information network on drugs and drug addiction
(Reitox) meetings for heads of focal points. Although the number of treatment centres has
increased to 28, their capacity is still insufficient. Data collection and analysis capacity need
to be improved.
For more information on customs cooperation, see Chapter 29- Customs union.
Conclusion
There was good progress in the area of justice, freedom and security in a challenging
environment. Turkey is making considerable humanitarian efforts in supporting an increasing
influx of refugees from Syria as well as from Iraq. Despite this considerable burden, it has
taken important steps as regards migration and asylum policy. The entry into force of the Law
on Foreigners and International Protection and the establishment of the General Directorate
for Migration Management (GDMM) are significant reforms which need to be complemented
by the timely adoption of implementing regulations. Building institutional capacity in the
central administration and the provinces is a significant challenge for the GDMM. The
signature and entry into force of the EU–Turkey readmission agreement and the launch of the
visa liberalisation dialogue is a welcome development. Turkey needs to reform its border
authorities to ensure more effective and integrated border management. Turkey made some
progress in the fight against organised crime. Turkey improved its programme to counter the
financing of terrorism. The adoption of a data protection law is a necessary pre-condition for
further international police and judicial cooperation. Overall, alignment in the area of justice
and home affairs is moderately advanced.
4.25.    Chapter 25: Science and research
The level of participation in the EU framework programme for research (FP7) increased.
The overall success rate also increased to 16.2 %, compared to the EU average of 21.6 %.
Participation is good in ICT, food safety and biotechnology and in research on environment.
Participation in Marie Sklodowska-Curie Actions and by SMEs continued to increase. Turkey
has also been more successful in obtaining grants allocated by the European Research

                                               66
 Council. An agreement for Turkey’s association to the new EU research and innovation
programme Horizon 2020 (covering 2014-20) was signed in June, allowing for retroactive
participation of entities from the country as from 1 January 2014.
As regard further integration into the European Research Area, Turkey has observer status
in the European Research Area Committee. The level of investment in research is about 0.9 %
of GDP, which is below the EU average of 2.07 %.
According to the 2014 Innovation Union Scoreboard, Turkey is a modest innovator, well
below the EU average on almost all indicators. In 2013, Turkey adopted the tenth
development plan, covering 2014-18, aiming to improve science, technology and innovation,
as one of the building blocks for innovative production and steady growth. The Supreme
Council for Science and Technology also set new targets for Turkey’s national innovation and
entrepreneurship system, aiming to be among the top 10 economies in the world by 2023.
These targets aim to increase R&D investments to 3 % of Turkey’s GDP, of which 2 % should
come from private business expenditure, and to raise the number of ‘full-time equivalent’
researchers to 300 000 and 180 000 FTE researchers in the business sector.
Conclusion
Further progress has been made in the area of science and research. Steps were taken to
further build Turkey’s research and innovation capacity at national level and facilitate
integration into the European Research Area. Serious efforts will be necessary to meet the
challenges of participation in the new EU Horizon 2020 programme. Overall, Turkey is well
prepared in this area.
4.26.   Chapter 26: Education and culture
In the area of education, training and youth, applications for the Lifelong Learning and
Youth in Action programmes, 55 % funded by the EU, continued to grow considerably. More
than 3 600 grant agreements with institutions and individuals were signed. The total number
of final beneficiaries reached 70 000.
Turkey adopted legislation to close down private preparatory schools for university entrance
exams (Dershanes) by 1 September 2015. The law also restructures the Ministry of National
Education, abolishing various central and provincial senior management positions in the
Ministry.
Turkey reported that the net enrolment rate for pre-school education for children aged five for
2013-14 increased by two percentage points to 42.5 %. For primary school children, the
enrolment rate increased from 98.9 % to 99.6 %; for lower secondary school, the rate
increased from 93 % to 94.5 %; and for secondary education, the enrolment rate increased by
more than six percentage points, to 76.7 %. However, drop-out rates cannot be monitored
systematically. Continued work is needed to increase attendance at all levels, especially for
girls, as, despite improvements, 61 % of the working age population in 2013 only had lower
secondary education (eight years of schooling). The gender disparity remains considerable in
some regions while the gender gap in secondary education continued to decrease (now at
1.2 %).
Turkey is at an advanced stage of implementing the Bologna process recommendations in
some universities; however, significant quality differences persist among Turkey’s 176
universities. An independent and fully functional quality assurance and accreditation agency
has not yet been created. Preparations for the agreed quality assurance agency for higher
education have not yet started. The Turkish qualifications framework for lifelong learning is
expected to be adopted in 2014.
Participation in the Youth in Action programme continued to grow. In May 2014, Turkey
signed its full participation in the ‘Erasmus+’ programme.

                                              67
 In the area of culture, the promotion of cultural industries, preparation of site management
plans for heritage areas and their restoration are integrated in the tenth development plan.
Financial support was withdrawn from some private theatres which took part in the Gezi
events in 2013 and the government revealed plans to abolish state theatres and ballet and their
replacement by an art institution, provoking the criticism of CSOs. The UNESCO Convention
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, signed by Turkey in
October 2005, has not been ratified. Turkey has not yet signed up to the ‘Creative Europe’
programme.
Conclusion
There has been some progress in the area of education and culture. Interest in EU programmes
continued to rise. The UNESCO Convention has not yet been ratified. Overall, Turkey is
moderately advanced in this area.
4.27.    Chapter 27: Environment and climate change
In October 2013, Turkey amended again its horizontal legislation on the environment in a
way that was not consistent with the requirements of the Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) Directive, by introducing additional exemptions to the EIA. Several large infrastructure
projects are excluded from national EIA procedures, such as micro hydropower plants and the
third bridge on the Bosphorus. The Constitutional Court annulled two amendments
introducing exemptions to investments from environmental legislation which were not in line
with the acquis. Procedures for trans-boundary consultations have not been aligned with the
acquis and Turkey has not yet sent its draft for general bilateral agreements on EIA
cooperation in a trans-boundary context to the relevant Member States. Alignment with the
Strategic Environmental Assessments Directive is under way. Turkey should align with
related acquis on access to information, public participation and access to justice in
environmental matters (UNECE Aarhus Convention related), which would enhance public
participation and provide a clear framework for solving ongoing disputes on investment
decisions with substantial impacts on environment and climate change.
In the area of air quality, national legislation needs to be adopted in line with the directives on
ambient air quality, national emissions ceilings and volatile organic compounds.
In the field of waste management, work has continued to bring landfill facilities up to EU
standards. Sorting, recycling and medical waste treatment capacity has increased. Further
work is needed on separating collection and reducing biodegradables. Requirements on
preparation and implementation of waste management plans, stemming from the EU Waste
Framework Directive, have not yet been met. Legislation for alignment with the Mining
Waste Directive needs to be adopted.
In the area of water quality, the conversion of the river basin protection action plans into river
basin management plans is ongoing. An implementing law on surface and groundwater
monitoring aimed at increasing acquis alignment was adopted in February. A National Basin
Management Strategy (2014-2020) has been adopted. Trans-boundary consultations on water
issues with neighbouring countries are still at an early stage. The wastewater treatment
capacity has increased as a result of continuous investment. The new Metropolitan
Municipality Law came into force in March and is expected to improve the implementation of
certain environmental directives such as the Urban Waste Water Directive.
Framework legislation on nature protection, the national biodiversity strategy and action plan
still have to be adopted. The draft Nature Protection Law is not in line with the EU acquis. If
adopted without implementing legislation, the law would repeal the National Parks Law,
causing a legal vacuum. The potential Natura 2000 sites have not yet been identified. Turkey
has adopted a series of laws allowing investments in wetlands, forests and natural site areas,
which is not in line with the acquis.

                                                68
 As regards industrial pollution control and risk management, legislation implementing the
Industrial Emissions Directive needs to be adopted. An implementing law on preventing and
mitigating the effects of large industrial accidents, aiming to increase alignment with the
‘Seveso II’ Directive, was adopted in December. As regards chemicals, legislation needs to be
adopted to implement the Regulation on Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and
Restriction of Chemicals. A law on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and
mixtures, aiming to increase alignment with the acquis, was adopted. Legislative alignment in
the field of noise is well advanced.
Turkey started discussions on participation in the EU Civil Protection Mechanism. A new
law on disasters and emergency response was adopted in December.
Turkey’s national climate change action plan lacks an overall domestic greenhouse gas
emissions reductions target. Turkey, which has a high level of emissions, has not yet put
forward a greenhouse gas emissions reduction target. At international level Turkey’s special
circumstances were recognised under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol. In December 2013, Turkey submitted its fifth
national communication to the UNFCCC, which however lacks greenhouse gas projections
for the country. Turkey recently initiated preparations for putting forward its intended
nationally determined contribution to the 2015 Climate Agreement, which needs to be
completed by the first quarter of 2015 and be consistent with those of the EU and its Member
States. Turkey should start reflecting on its climate and energy framework for 2030, in line
with the expected EU policy framework on climate and energy.
As regards alignment with climate acquis, legislation has been adopted to align with the Fuel
Quality Directive. Preparations are ongoing to set up and implement a monitoring, reporting
and verification system, and build capacity regarding land use, land use change and forestry,
and fluorinated gases. Turkey signed an agreement with the World Bank on a capacity-
building support programme to pilot greenhouse gas emission monitoring, reporting and
verification in the electricity sector and on technical capacity transfer to Turkey on carbon
markets. The lack of an overall greenhouse gas emissions target however constitutes a barrier
to further development of Turkey’s carbon market mechanisms. Similarly, the lack of
comprehensive and scientific research on the impacts of climate change in Turkey limits the
integration of adaptation measures to sector policies and is a reason to underestimate the
consequences of changes in climatic conditions. Turkey participated regularly in the
Environment and Climate Change Regional Accession Network (ECRAN) project. More
events on climate-related issues are being organised, but awareness-raising on climate action
still needs to considerably improve.
The re-establishment of a dedicated Climate Change Department within the Ministry of
Environment and Urbanisation is a positive step for administrative capacity. Better
complementarity needs to be found between this ministry and other concerned ministries
regarding the environment, climate and development agendas. Further work is needed to
strengthen cooperation and coordination between various institutions with responsibilities in
the fields of environment and climate change.
Conclusion
Turkey has made some progress in aligning legislation in the fields of environment and
climate change, whereas enforcement remains weak. While a stronger political commitment
and re-establishment of regular policy dialogue on environment and climate change would
help accelerating the alignment with and implementation of the acquis, the real challenge
remains to conciliate growth and environmental concerns. More ambitious and better
coordinated environment and climate policies still need to be established and implemented.
Changes to legislation on EIA and nature protection raise serious concerns. Strategic
planning, substantial investments and stronger administrative capacity are required. The
                                             69
 country needs to put forward by the first quarter of 2015 its intended contribution to the 2015
Climate Agreement. Cooperation with civil society and other stakeholders needs to be
strengthened. Preparations in the areas of environment and climate change are still at an early
stage.
4.28.    Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection
As regards horizontal aspects of consumer protection, the Directorate General for Consumer
Protection and Market Surveillance further improved its online services and increased its
awareness-raising and consumer education activities. The need to strengthen the consumer
movement remains. Constructive dialogue and cooperation need to be further sustained to
allow for relevant stakeholders’ active involvement in policy and law-making.
Concerning product safety-related issues, full alignment with the General Product Safety
Directive and the Directive on Dangerous Imitations has not yet been achieved. In the area of
market surveillance, the Ministry of Science, Industry and Technology issued new regulations
and the national market surveillance database became operational. Overall, market
surveillance is not yet effectively implemented. (See also Chapter 1 — Free movement of
goods)
As regards non-safety-related issues, the new Consumer Protection Law, which aims at
aligning with the acquis, entered into force in May 2014. The law contains provisions in
favour of consumers on: credit cards, early payment of house and consumer loans, complex
contracts, interest rate in consumer transactions, right of retraction, timeshare property sales,
real estate sales on the basis of architectural models, door-to-door sales, defective goods,
online shopping and distance contracts, distance sales of financial services, termination of
subscriptions, promotional campaigns organised by newspapers and journals, and pyramid
sales systems. The enforcement capacity of consumer courts, including the Supreme Court,
related chambers and arbitration committees, needs to be strengthened. Consumer court
decisions are not accessible.
On horizontal aspects of public health, the institutional reform of the system has resulted in
multiple responsible organisations at local level, requiring a coordination mechanism for
better management, especially for monitoring and evaluation. Solutions for personal data
confidentiality and security under the national health information system are still pending.
In the area of tobacco control, Turkey continues to be the country with the highest
implementation scores, according to the World Health Organisation’s 2013 global tobacco
control report.
As for communicable diseases, Turkey has improved its ability to detect and respond to
public health emergencies through a national early warning and response system with at least
one focal point in all 81 provinces. However, this does not cover all EU reportable diseases.
Provincial standard operating procedures have been tested in 22 provinces. A national field
epidemiology training programme and a laboratory training programme have been put in
place to ensure continuing education in disease control. Additionally, for health security, an
inter-sectoral collaboration process has been initiated. Institutional mechanisms must be in
place to fully implement these expanded mandates in a sustainable manner. Turkey has not
yet finalised its strategic action plan on HIV/AIDS. Further awareness raising activities are
needed.
In the field of blood, tissues, cells and organs, the guide for preparation, use and quality
assurance of blood and blood components has been updated. National standards for blood
services, national guidelines on total quality management and inspection guide are distributed
to all technical staff. A policy and a strategy document, setting out the supplier and user sides
of the blood system, have been developed with a view to harmonising blood legislation with
the acquis, based on a situational analysis of all the blood centres. As a result, changes

                                               70
 required include the establishment of a competent authority, and the allocation of resources to
ensure an efficient and safe blood system. The organ donation and transplantation
legislation, and the tissue and cells legislation improved the alignment with EU Directives
and international best practices.
In the area of mental health operational guidelines for community mental health centres and
for community-based social care services were disseminated. There were 81 community
mental health centres in 59 provinces. Fifty-two ‘hope houses’ have been opened to provide
residential care. Work continued on building the necessary human resources capacity in this
field. An ‘omnibus’ law in February 2014 aligned provisions for residential care for people
with mental disabilities with the acquis. An independent body to monitor and inspect mental
health institutions has yet to be established.
As regards health inequalities, while each registered citizen has access to health services
through a local family physician, the access of unregistered citizens to health services and the
availability and quality of services, including for older people and people with disabilities,
need improvement. In the field of nutrition, Turkey participated in the European child obesity
survey for the first time, in cooperation with the World Health Organisation. In the field of
alcohol-related harm reduction, legislation to put labels carrying warning messages on
alcoholic beverages came into force in June 2014.
Conclusion
There has been some progress in the area of consumer and health protection. However,
consumer rights enforcement needs improvement at all levels, and the consumer movement
remains weak. Intensive capacity-building for staff and management at central and local
levels continues to be necessary in order to meet the EU technical requirements in the area of
public health. Overall, preparations in this area are well on track.
4.29.   Chapter 29: Customs union
With regard to customs legislation, some customs rules still need to be aligned with the
acquis. Local clearance and relevant simplifications have been extended to import
transactions, in line with the authorised economic operator concept introduced last year.
Turkey has started preparations for harmonisation with the Union customs code.
The rules on free zones and duty relief legislation are not aligned with the acquis. Duty free
shops at entry points are neither aligned with the acquis nor compliant with the Customs
Union (CU). Implementation of surveillance measures based on minimum CIF (cost,
insurance and freight) or customs value is not in line with the acquis and contrary to CU
provisions. Turkey introduced additional customs duties on imports of footwear from third
countries other than the products originating in the EU and in Turkey’s free trade partners
even if the goods were in free circulation in the EU. The requirement to present proof of
origin for some goods in free circulation in the EU, such as woven fabrics and apparel, when
imported to Turkey is not in line with the CU.
In the area of administrative and operational capacity, Turkey continued to increase its
customs enforcement capacity, in particular regarding anti-smuggling operations. The
Ministry of Customs and Trade has taken some measures to sustain and further strengthen the
capacity of local risk management units. Regarding intellectual property rights (IPR)
enforcement at customs, the system of online applications has operated smoothly and the
number of seizure applications slightly increased. The level of coordination and cooperation
with the right holders remained satisfactory. Further work is required to increase the customs
enforcement capacity, in particular ex officio customs inspections and destructions under the
simplified procedure, and to align with the acquis in the area of IPR customs legislation.



                                              71
 Although the new computerised transit system has been operational since last year, tariff IT
systems (TARIC, quota and surveillance) have not yet been launched. This is also required for
future inter-connectivity and interoperability with the EU IT systems. Preparations are still
underway on developing a strategy for convergence of IT activities with business objectives.
Conclusion
Little progress was made in the field of customs legislation. Shortcomings remain in the area
of duty relief, free zones, surveillance measures, tariff quotas and the requirement to present
proof of origin for some goods in free circulation. Although capacity-building efforts have
increased, further progress is required on intellectual property rights enforcement at customs.
Overall, the level of alignment in the area of customs union remains high.
4.30.   Chapter 30: External relations
With regard to common commercial policy, Turkey has reviewed its generalised system of
preferences in line with the new EU scheme, without fully aligning with EU rules of origin,
geographic and product coverage. During the reporting period, Turkey has adopted the
safeguard measure on imports of terephthalic acid (TPA). Turkey has initiated a safeguard
investigation on imports of paper and extended an investigation on safeguards on imports of
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) while extending for the second time all three safeguard
measures on imports of certain electrical appliances, frames for spectacles and travel goods,
handbags and similar containers. Turkey’s level of coordination with the EU within the WTO
remains satisfactory, in particular as regards the Doha Development Agenda and the G-20.
Thanks to the Customs Union, Turkey maintains a high level of alignment with the EU
common commercial policy. However, with regard to dual-use export controls, Turkey has
not aligned with the EU position on membership of certain multilateral export control
arrangements, such as the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional
Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies. Moreover, Turkey has not aligned with the EU
position on medium and long-term export credits to companies. Turkey’s General Agreement
on Trade in Services (GATS) commitments are not entirely aligned with those of the EU.
As regards bilateral agreements with third countries, Turkey continued free trade
negotiations with Ukraine and signed a trade agreement with Iran. Furthermore, Turkey
signed six bilateral investment treaties in 2013 and another two in 2014.
In the field of development policy and humanitarian aid, the total amount of official
development aid granted by Turkey in 2013 increased from € 1.9 billion in 2012 to € 2.5
billion. The level of alignment in this field is satisfactory.
Conclusion
Little progress was made in the area of external relations. Further alignment is required in
areas such as the generalised system of preferences and dual-use export controls. Prolonged
and intensive use of safeguard measures remains a cause of concern. Overall, the level of
alignment in the area of external relations remains high.
4.31.   Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy
The regular political dialogue between the EU and Turkey continued to intensify, covering
international issues of common interest, including developments in North Africa, the Horn of
Africa, the Middle East and the Gulf, the Middle East peace process, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Russia, Ukraine, the Southern Caucasus, Central Asia, counter-terrorism, foreign fighters and
non-proliferation issues. Informal EU-Turkey consultations took place on, inter alia, closer
common security and defence policy cooperation, the Western Balkans and Asia/Pacific. (For
more information on relations with other enlargement countries and EU Member States, see
Political criteria— Regional issues and international obligations). The EU counter-terrorism
coordinator visited Turkey in April.
                                              72
 As regards the common foreign and security policy (CFSP), Turkey aligned itself, when
invited, with 13 out of 45 EU declarations and Council decisions (29 % alignment compared
to 46 % during the reference period of the 2013 Progress Report). Turkey did not align with
Council decisions, including EU restrictive measures, on Russia’s illegal annexation of
Crimea and events in eastern Ukraine. Turkey voted in favour of the UN General Assembly
resolution on territorial integrity of Ukraine. Turkey condemned and did not recognise the
annexation of Crimea by Russia and has expressed a particular interest in the security of the
Crimean Tatars. Turkey has not yet signed the statute of the International Criminal Court.
Turkey continued to develop and expand its diplomatic footprint and bilateral relations, and
strengthened relations with countries in Asia, Africa and Central/Latin America. Turkey has
also continued its work to improve cooperation with and between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The process of normalisation with Israel, launched in March 2013, has not yet been
concluded. Turkish authorities strongly criticised Israel’s military operation ‘Protective Edge’
in the Gaza strip. Turkey was involved in the ceasefire negotiations, continued to maintain
open channels of communication with both Fatah and Hamas and provided Gaza with
humanitarian assistance.
Turkey continued to be vocal on the crisis in Syria and its spill-over effects, strongly and
repeatedly condemning the Syrian regime’s violence against civilians. It supported efforts to
increase inclusivity of the Syrian Opposition Coalition and provided vital humanitarian
assistance to a steadily increasing number of Syrians fleeing their country. Restrictive
measures on Syria remained in place. Relations with Iran have improved and a number of
high-level visits took place. Relations with Iraq were affected by differences related to the
direct export of energy resources to Turkey by the Kurdistan Regional Government in
Northern Iraq. Following ISIL/IS offensive in Iraq, the personnel of Turkey’s General
Consulate in Mosul was taken hostage. Turkey provided humanitarian assistance to the
Northern part of Iraq, in particular for the Turkmen population and hosted several hundred
refugees, notably from the Yazidi community. Relations with Egypt significantly deteriorated
and the respective Ambassadors were recalled.
Regarding the Southern Caucasus and Central Asia, Turkey maintained its policy of
engagement through the Turkic Council, high-level strategic cooperation councils
(Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan) and trilateral meetings between Foreign Ministers
(Turkey/Georgia/Azerbaijan and Turkey/Azerbaijan/Iran). In April, Prime Minister Erdogan
issued a significant statement offering condolences to the descendants of the 1915 events. The
protocols signed in 2009 to normalise relations with Armenia are still not ratified.
Turkey and the United States consulted regularly on regional developments and cooperated on
security and counter-terrorism. High-level visits and talks with Russia and Western Balkan
countries took place. Turkey formally applied for membership of the Asia-Europe Meeting.
Turkey joined the Asia Cooperation Dialogue and attended its first ministerial meeting.
Several high level visits took place and a nuclear cooperation agreement was signed with
Japan.
Turkey is party to all international arrangements on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Turkey has not aligned yet with the EU position on membership of the Wassenaar
Arrangement (see Chapter 30 — External relations), and the Missile Technology Control
Regime. Turkey signed the UN Arms Trade Treaty in July 2013.
Turkey continued to engage actively in cooperation with international organisations. It has
pursued its candidacy for a non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council for 2015-16.
Turkey continued to participate in civil and military crisis management operations in the
framework of the common security and defence policy (CSDP). Turkey contributed to the
EU military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR ALTHEA, the EULEX mission in

                                              73
 Kosovo and EUPOL-COPPS in the occupied Palestinian territory. Turkey made a concrete
offer to contribute to EUFOR CAR and EUBAM Libya and is considering the possibility of
joining EUTM Mali. The first working visit of the EU Military Staff to Turkey took place in
January. The issue of EU-NATO cooperation going beyond the ‘Berlin plus’ arrangements,
involving all EU Member States, has not yet been resolved.
Conclusion
The political dialogue between the EU and Turkey on foreign and security policy continued to
expand and intensify. Turkey continued to take a prominent position on Syria, supporting the
opposition and providing vital humanitarian assistance. Turkey continued to participate in
civil and military crisis management operations. The country’s alignment with EU
declarations and Council decisions significantly declined compared to previous years and
needs to be improved. Overall, preparations in this field are moderately advanced.
4.32.    Chapter 32: Financial control
In the area of public internal financial control (PIFC), the Ministry of Finance issued a
circular on alignment with internal control standards. The ministry also published a public
internal control guidebook. The Central Harmonisation Unit for financial management and
control has drafted a central harmonisation guidebook. With regard to internal audit, the
Ministry of Finance issued a circular on the appointment of internal auditors and internal audit
practices. The Internal Audit Coordination Board announced the 2014-16 internal audit
strategy document. The appointment of internal auditors at central and local administration is
yet to be completed. The revised PIFC policy paper, which will also need to clarify the role of
internal auditors and ensure the compatibility of centralised financial inspection with
managerial responsibility, needs to be finalised and adopted.
With regard to external audit, the Turkish Court of Accounts Law has not yet been
implemented fully. A working group has been set up between the Turkish Court of Accounts
and the Ministry of Finance and another one has yet to be set up with the Parliament to reach
an agreement on addressing the problems encountered in the audit reports submitted to
parliament in 2013. Meanwhile, the books, financial tables and documents will no longer be
directly accessible by the Turkish Court of Accounts, and be prepared only as consolidated
version by the Ministry of Finance. Parliamentary follow-up to audit reports needs to be
improved institutionally and in terms of analytical expertise.
Concerning the protection of the EU’s financial interests, the Prime Ministry Inspection
Board (PMIB) operates as Turkey’s anti-fraud coordination service, responsible for
cooperation with the European Commission. The PMIB issued guidelines on the investigation
process for any irregularities in the EU Funds. It updated the anti-fraud coordination service’s
training strategy. The Turkish penal code complies with the Convention on the Protection of
the European Communities’ Financial Interests and its Protocols.
In the area of protection of the euro against counterfeiting, Turkey actively participates in
the Pericles programme. The Turkish National Police has been designated the national central
office to ensure cooperation with the EU institutions as part of the counterfeit tracking system.
The national central office will need to improve the centralisation of technical and police
information. Financial penalties are in place for credit institutions which do not withdraw
counterfeits from circulation. The Turkish institutions have prepared a road map for
strengthening cooperation with Europol and to enact the operational cooperation agreement.
Conclusion
There was some progress in the area of financial control, especially on PIFC. Further steps are
needed in particular for the revision of the PIFC policy paper, reinforcement of the internal
audit function in the public administration and the compatibility of the centralised inspection

                                               74
 function with PIFC. Regarding external audit, the Court of Accounts Law will need to be
implemented fully. Overall, preparations in this area are moderately advanced.
4.33.    Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions
Basic principles and institutions in policy areas related to the application of the own resources
system are already in place. (For developments in these areas, see Chapters 16 — Taxation;
18 — Statistics; 29 — Customs union; and 32 —Financial control.). In the area of traditional
own resources, Turkey´s customs legislation largely complies with the acquis.
Preparations in the area of the value added tax-based resource to calculate the statistical
VAT base are yet to start. Turkey will need to take sound measures to combat fraud on VAT
and customs duties in order to ensure appropriate contribution to the own resources system
upon membership. In terms of the gross national income-based resource, Turkey will need
to align with the recent development in the European system of accounts towards ESA 2010.
In the field of administrative infrastructure, Turkey, by the time of accession, will need to
have established coordination structures and implementing rules for accurate collection,
accounting, monitoring, payment and control of own resources as well as reporting to the EU.
Conclusion
There has been no progress in the area of financial and budgetary provisions. Overall,
preparations in the area of financial and budgetary provisions are at an early stage.




                                               75
                                                       STATISTICAL ANNEX
STATISTICAL DATA
 Turkey

 Basic data                                               Note       2001      2009      2010        2011        2012        2013
 Population (thousand)                                    1)        64 730e   71 517b   72 561      73 723      74 724      75 627
 Total area of the country (km²)                                    783 562   783 562   783 562     783 562     783 562     783 562

 National accounts                                                   2001      2009        2010        2011        2012        2013
 Gross domestic product (GDP) (million national                     240 224   952 559   1 098 799   1 297 713   1 416 798   1 561 510
 currency)
 Gross domestic product (GDP) (million euro)                        219 815   440 942   547 347     556 278     611 909     618 393
 GDP (euro per capita)                                                3 373    6 121      7 483       7 494       8 139      8 131
 GDP (in Purchasing Power Standards (PPS) per                        7 400e   10 900b    12 200      13 400      13 800         :
 capita)
 GDP (in Purchasing Power Standards (PPS) per                         37       46b         50          53          54          55
 capita), relative to the EU average (EU-28 = 100)
 Real GDP growth rate: change on previous year of                    -5.7      -4.8        9.2         8.8         2.1         4.0
 GDP volume (%)
 Employment growth (national accounts data), relative                -0.3f     0.4f       6.2f        6.7f        2.9f        2.8f
 to the previous year (%)
 Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (constant                 -5.5f     -5.2f      2.8f        1.9f        -0.8f       1.2f
 prices) per person employed, relative to the previous
 year (%)
 Unit labour cost growth, relative to the previous year                :         :          :           :           :           :
 (%)
 **3 year change (T/T-3) in the nominal unit labour                    :         :          :           :           :           :
 cost growth index (2005 = 100)
 Labour productivity per person employed: GDP (in                    49.2f     70.0f      69.9f       72.5f         :           :
 PPS) per person employed relative to EU average
 (EU-27 = 100)
 Gross value added by main sectors
 Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%)                  2)         8.8       8.3        8.4         8.0         7.9          7.4
 Industry (%)                                             2)         22.3      19.1       19.4        19.9        19.4        19.1
 Construction (%)                                         2)         4.5       3.8        4.2         4.4         4.4          4.4
 Services (%)                                             2)         58.5      59.6       57.2        56.4        57.4        57.6
 Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP                    80.8      86.2        86         85.1        85.0        86.0
 (%)
 Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%)                15.9      16.9       18.9        21.8        20.3        20.3
 Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%)                       -0.9      -1.9       0.6         1.7         -0.1        0.3
 Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                  27.4      23.3       21.2        24.0        26.3        25.7
 Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                  23.3      24.4       26.8        32.6        31.5        32.3

 Industry                                                 Note       2001      2009      2010        2011        2012        2013
 Industrial production volume index (2010 = 100)          3)           :       88.6      100.0       110.1       112.9       116.3

 Inflation rate and house prices                          Note       2001      2009       2010        2011        2012        2013
 Consumer price index (CPI), change relative to the                  56.8       6.3        8.6         6.5         9.0         7.5
 previous year (%)
 **Annual change in the deflated house price index                     :         :          :           :           :           :
 (2010 = 100)

 Balance of payments                                      Note       2001      2009       2010        2011        2012        2013
 Balance of payments: current account total (million                 4 198    -8 724     -34 282     -53 945     -36 400        :
 euro)
 Balance of payments current account: trade balance                 -3 755    -17 816    -42 553     -64 037     -51 115    -60 200s
 (million euro)
 Balance of payments current account: net services                  10 201    13 322     12 565      14 461      18 845     17 679s
 (million euro)
 Balance of payments current account: net income                    -5 583    -5 956     -5 442      -5 633      -5 196         :
 (million euro)
 Balance of payments current account: net current                    3 335     1 727     1 149       1 263       1 067          :


                                                               76
 transfers (million euro)
of which government transfers (million euro)                           224        853       425       570       430         :
**3 year backward moving average of the current                         :          :         :         :         :          :
account balance relative to GDP (%)
**Five year change in share of world exports of                          :         :          :         :         :         :
goods and services (%)
Net inward foreign direct investment (FDI) (million                   3 187.8   5 097.5    5 711.7    9 840     6 573       :
euro)
Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro)                 554.9     1 113.4    1 104.3    1 688     3 171       :
of which FDI of the reporting economy in the EU-28                      :          :          :          :         :        :
countries (million euro)
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting                      3 742.7   6 210.9    6 816.0   11 528     9 744       :
economy (million euro)
of which FDI of the EU-28 countries in the reporting                     :         :          :         :         :         :
economy (million euro)
**Net international investment position, relative to                     :         :          :         :         :         :
GDP (%)

Public finance                                             Note        2001      2009       2010      2011      2012      2013
General government deficit / surplus, relative to GDP                  -23.7     -6.5       -2.9      -0.8f     -0.3        :
(%)
General government gross debt relative to GDP (%)                      77.3       46.1      42.3      39.1f     36.2        :

Financial indicators                                       Note        2001      2009       2010      2011      2012      2013
Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to                   58.7      42.2       39.5        :         :         :
GDP (%)
Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to                  362.5      262.8      254.0       :         :         :
total exports (%)
Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight              4)         8 965     49 691b    65 976    65 555    72 816       :
deposits, million euro)
Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up        5)         37 253    228 237b   286 595   274 239   300 693      :
to two years, million euro)
Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments,          6)         38 973    240 246b   300 348   288 210   317 047      :
million euro)
Total credit by monetary financial institutions to                    26 977    153 867    231 862   255 706   303 509      :
residents (consolidated) (million euro)
**Annual change in financial sector liabilities (%)                      :         :          :         :         :         :
**Private credit flow, consolidated, relative to GDP                     :         :          :         :         :         :
(%)
**Private debt, consolidated, relative to GDP (%)                       :           :          :         :         :        :
Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%)                  95.47       9.22       6.59      7.28      7.59       :
Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%)            7)         78.82      19.65      14.83     12.27     9.00        :
Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%)            8)         62.17      17.20      14.99     14.19     5.00        :
euro exchange rates: average of period (1 euro = …                    1.094      2.151      1.989     2.322     2.314     2.534
national currency)
Trade-weighted effective exchange rate index (2005         9)         153.8       80.9      86.8      74.4      74.5        :
= 100)
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the trade-weighted                            :         :          :         :         :         :
effective exchange rate index, 42 countries (2005 =
100)
Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro)               22 660     52 160    64 874    68 391    90 332       :

External trade in goods                                    Note        2001       2009       2010      2011     2012      2013
Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro)              46 225    100 996    139 957   173 016   184 110   189 482
Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro)              34 987     73 228     85 977    96 922   118 724   114 296
Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro)                 -11 238   -27 768    -53 980   -76 095   -65 386   -75 186
Terms of trade (export price index / import price          10)          96         105        96        93       96        98
index * 100) (number)
Share of exports to EU-28 countries in value of total                  56.7       47.0      47.3      47.2      39.6      42.3
exports (%)
Share of imports from EU-28 countries in value of                      47.9       40.3      39.1      38.0      37.1      36.8
total imports (%)




                                                                 77
 Demography                                             Note        2001    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
Crude rate of natural change of population (natural    11)         13.4e   12.1    11.8    11.5    11.6    10.6e
growth rate): number of births minus deaths (per
thousand inhabitants)
Infant mortality rate deaths of children under one     11)         28.3e   13.9b   12.0    11.7    11.6    10.8
year of age (per thousand live births)
Life expectancy at birth: male (years)                             69.8e   73.9e   74.2e   74.4e   74.6e   74.7e
Life expectancy at birth: female (years)                           73.9e   78.4e   78.7e   78.9e   79.1e   79.2e

Labour market                                          Note        2001    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
Economic activity rate for persons aged 20–64:                       :     54.5    55.9    57.2    57.4    58.4
proportion of the population aged 20–64 that is
economically active (%)
*Employment rate for persons aged 20–64:                           51.2    47.8    50.0    52.2    52.8    53.4
proportion of the population aged 20–64 that are in
employment (%)
Male employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%)                    75.3    70.4    72.7    75.1    75.0    75.3
Female employment rate for persons aged 20–64                      27.4    25.8    28.0    29.8    30.9    31.8
(%)
Employment rate for persons aged 55–64: proportion                 35.9    28.2    29.6    31.4    31.9    31.5
of the population aged 55–64 that are in employment
(%)
Employment by main sectors
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%)                12)           :     24.6    25.2    25.5    24.6    23.6
Industry (%)                                                         :     19.2    19.9    19.5    19.1    19.4
Construction (%)                                                     :      6.1     6.3     7.0     6.9     7.0
Services (%)                                                         :     50.1    48.6    48.1    49.4    50.0
Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force                    :     12.7    10.8     8.8     8.2     8.8
that is unemployed (%)
Male unemployment rate (%)                                           :     12.7    10.5    8.3     7.7     8.0
Female unemployment rate (%)                                         :     12.8    11.6    10.1    9.4     10.6
Youth unemployment rate: proportion of the labour                    :     23.1    19.9    16.7    15.7    16.9
force aged 15–24 that is unemployed (%)
Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the                       :      3.2     3.0     2.3     2.0     2.1
labour force that has been unemployed for 12
months or more (%)

Social cohesion                                        Note        2001    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
Average nominal monthly wages and salaries             13)           :     1 084   1 142   1 242   1 327     :
(national currency)
Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal                   :       :       :       :       :       :
wages and salaries divided by the inflation index)
(2000 = 100)
*Early leavers from education and training:            14)         58.1    44.3b   43.1    41.9    39.6    37.6p
proportion of the population aged 18–24 with at most
lower secondary education who are not in further
education or training (%)

Standard of living                                     Note        2001    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
Number of passenger cars relative to population size               70.1e   99.2b   104.0   110.0   115.7   122.8
(number per thousand population)
Number of mobile phone subscriptions relative to                   283e    865b    837     874     895     909
population size (number per thousand population)

Infrastructure                                         Note        2001    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
Density of railway network (lines in operation per                 11.1    11.6    12.2    12.3    12.3    12.4
thousand km²)
Length of motorways (kilometres)                                   1 696   2 036   2 080   2 119   2 127   2 127

Innovation and research                                Note        2001    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
Public expenditure on education relative to GDP (%)                 2.7      :       :       :       :       :
*Gross domestic expenditure on R&D relative to         15)         0.54    0.85b   0.84    0.86    0.92      :
GDP (%)
Percentage of households who have internet access                    :     30.0    41.6    42.9    47.2    49.1


                                                              78
 at home (%)

Environment                                             Note        2001      2009        2010          2011          2012           2013
*Index of greenhouse gas emissions, CO2 equivalent                  148.1     197.0       214.1         225.1         233.4            :
(1990 = 100)
Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent   16)         259.6     257.4       252.5            :            :              :
per 1 000 euro GDP at 2000 constant prices)
Electricity generated from renewable sources relative                19.2     19.7         26.5          25.3          27.0            :
to gross electricity consumption (%)
Road share of inland freight transport (based on                     95.2     94.9         94.6          94.3          94.5          95.4s
tonne-km) (%)

Energy                                                  Note         2001     2009         2010          2011         2012           2013
Primary production of all energy products (thousand                 24 576   30 328       32 487        32 229       31 964            :
TOE)
Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE)                      2 679    2 349        2 671         2 555        2 440             :
Primary production of hard coal and lignite (thousand               12 281   17 402       17 523        17 869       17 018            :
TOE)
Primary production of natural gas (thousand TOE)                     284       627         625           652           533             :
Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE)                   50 160    75 295      79 400        84 087        91 827           :
Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE)                      75 402   106 138     109 260       114 480       120 093           :
Electricity generation (thousand GWh)                               122.7     194.8       211.2         229.4         239.5            :

Agriculture                                             Note        2001      2009         2010         2011          2012           2013
Agricultural production volume index of goods and                   93.3        :            :            :             :              :
services (at producer prices) (previous year = 100)
Utilised agricultural area (thousand hectares)                      40 967   38 911       39 012        38 231       38 399          38 428
Livestock numbers: live bovine animals (thousand        17)         10 548   10 724       11 370        12 386       13 915          14 415
heads, end of period)
Livestock numbers: live swine (thousand heads, end                    3        2             2            2             3              3
of period)
Livestock numbers: live sheep and live goats                        33 994   26 878       29 383        32 310       35 783          38 510
(thousand heads, end of period)
Production and utilisation of milk on the farm (total               9 496    12 542       13 544        15 056       17 401          18 224
whole milk) (thousand tonnes)
Harvested crop production: cereals (including rice)                 29 571   33 577       32 773        35 202       33 377          37 489
(thousand tonnes)
Harvested crop production: sugar beet (thousand                     12 633   17 275       17 942        16 126       14 920          16 483
tonnes)
Harvested crop production: vegetables (thousand                     24 164   26 780       25 997        27 547       27 820          28 448
tonnes)

     : = not available
     b = break in series
     e = estimated value
     f = forecast
     p = provisional
     s = Eurostat estimate
     * = Europe 2020 indicator
     ** = Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) indicator

         Footnotes:

    1)   Values are derived from 2000–06 Population Estimates and 2007–13 Results of Address Based Population Registration
         System.
    2)   Calculated as a share of value added plus taxes and subsidies minus FISIM; shares therefore do not sum to 100% but show
         the relative size of the sectors.
    3)   Gross index, not calendar adjusted.
    4)   Break in series. From December 2005 onwards, M1 also includes currency in circulation and demand deposits in foreign
         currencies, not just in national currency. Furthermore, from December 2005 monetary liabilities of Participation Banks,
         Investment and Development Banks and the amount of Money Market Funds were added to money supply data.
    5)   Break in series. From December 2005 onwards, M2 includes M1 and time deposits in foreign currencies, not just in national
         currency. See also break in series for M1.




                                                               79
  6)   Break in series. From December 2005 onwards, M3 includes (in addition to M2 and official deposits (time/demand) which
      were already included previously) funds received from repo transactions and money market funds (B type liquid funds). See
      also break in series for M1 and M2.
 7)   Average of monthly data. Lending to enterprises more than one year.
 8)   Average of monthly data. Up to one year or longer.
 9)   Source: Eurostat's reference database (Eurobase).
10)   Expressed as an index with 2000 = 100. Time series were originally based on different reference years (2001, 1994 = 100;
      2009, 2003 = 100; since 2010, 2010 = 100).
11)   For detailed information, see the relevant metadata file of ‘Demographic Indicators’ table on TurkStat Web site, by clicking
      ‘Statistics by Theme’, ‘Population and Demography’, ‘Population Projections’, ‘Statistical Tables and Dynamic Search’,
      ‘Population Projections and Estimations ‘: http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreTablo.do?alt_id=1027.
12)   Includes NACE Rev. 2 Group 98.1 (undifferentiated goods-producing activities of private households for own use).
13)   2009: data from the income and living conditions survey.
14)   Annual LFS results. Break in series caused by the addition of 'participation in non-formal education or training' from 2004.

15)   Break in series due to the use of revised GDP series since 2007.
16)   Kg of oil equivalent per 1 000 euro GDP at 1998 constant prices.
17)   Excluding buffaloes.




                                                          80

