     EN




EN        EN
         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES




                                     Brussels, 05.11.2008
                                     SEC(2008) 2699 final




        COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT



        TURKEY 2008 PROGRESS REPORT


                       accompanying the

         COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION
     TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL

       Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2008-2009



                        {COM(2008)674}




EN                                                          EN
                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     1.      Introduction .................................................................................................................. 4
     1.1.    Preface.......................................................................................................................... 4
     1.2.    Context ......................................................................................................................... 4
     1.3.    Relations between the EU and Turkey......................................................................... 4
     2.      Political criteria ............................................................................................................ 6
     2.1.    Democracy and the rule of law .................................................................................... 6
     2.2.    Human rights and the protection of minorities .......................................................... 11
     2.3.    Regional issues and international obligations ............................................................ 28
     3.      Economic criteria ....................................................................................................... 29
     3.1.    The existence of a functioning market economy ....................................................... 29
     3.2.    The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union
             .................................................................................................................................... 34
     4.      Ability to assume the obligations of membership...................................................... 37
     4.1.    Chapter 1: Free movement of goods .......................................................................... 37
     4.2.    Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers .......................................................... 40
     4.3.    Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services ......................... 40
     4.4.    Chapter 4: Free movement of capital ......................................................................... 41
     4.5.    Chapter 5: Public procurement................................................................................... 43
     4.6.    Chapter 6: Company law............................................................................................ 44
     4.7.    Chapter 7: Intellectual property law........................................................................... 45
     4.8.    Chapter 8: Competition policy ................................................................................... 47
     4.9.    Chapter 9: Financial services ..................................................................................... 48
     4.10.   Chapter 10: Information society and media ............................................................... 50
     4.11.   Chapter 11: Agriculture.............................................................................................. 51
     4.12.   Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy .................................. 52
     4.13.   Chapter 13: Fisheries.................................................................................................. 54
     4.14.   Chapter 14: Transport policy ..................................................................................... 55
     4.15.   Chapter 15: Energy .................................................................................................... 56



EN                                                                      2                                                                              EN
      4.16.   Chapter 16: Taxation.................................................................................................. 58
     4.17.   Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy.............................................................. 59
     4.18.   Chapter 18: Statistics.................................................................................................. 60
     4.19.   Chapter 19: Social policy and employment ............................................................... 61
     4.20.   Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy.............................................................. 63
     4.21.   Chapter 21: Trans-European networks....................................................................... 64
     4.22.   Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments .................. 65
     4.23.   Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights ........................................................... 66
     4.24.   Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security ................................................................. 71
     4.25.   Chapter 25: Science and research .............................................................................. 75
     4.26.   Chapter 26: Education and culture............................................................................. 76
     4.27.   Chapter 27: Environment ........................................................................................... 77
     4.28.   Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection............................................................. 78
     4.29.   Chapter 29: Customs union........................................................................................ 80
     4.30.   Chapter 30: External relations.................................................................................... 81
     4.31.   Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy...................................................... 82
     4.32.   Chapter 32: Financial control..................................................................................... 84
     4.33.   Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions........................................................ 86

     STATISTICAL ANNEX




EN                                                                 3                                                                       EN
                          COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

                                TURKEY 2008 PROGRESS REPORT



     1.      INTRODUCTION

     1.1.    Preface

     Following the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council in December 1997, the
     Commission has reported regularly to the Council and the Parliament.

     This report on progress made by Turkey in preparing for EU membership largely follows the
     same structure as in previous years. The report:
     – briefly describes the relations between Turkey and the Union;
     – analyses the situation in Turkey in terms of the political criteria for membership;
     – analyses the situation in Turkey on the basis of the economic criteria for membership;
     – reviews Turkey's capacity to assume the obligations of membership, that is, the acquis
       expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation, and the policies of the Union.
     The period covered by this report is from 1 October 2007 to early October 2008. Progress is
     measured on the basis of decisions taken, legislation adopted and measures implemented. As a
     rule, legislation or measures which are under preparation or awaiting Parliamentary approval
     have not been taken into account. This approach ensures equal treatment across all reports and
     permits an objective assessment.

     The report is based on information gathered and analysed by the Commission. In addition,
     many sources have been used, including contributions from the government of Turkey, the
     Member States, European Parliament reports1, and information from various international and
     non-governmental organisations.

     The Commission draws detailed conclusions regarding Turkey in its separate communication
     on enlargement2, based on the technical analysis contained in this report.

     1.2.    Context

     The Helsinki European Council of December 1999 granted the status of candidate country to
     Turkey. Accession negotiations with Turkey were opened in October 2005.

     The Association Agreement between Turkey and the then EEC was signed in 1963 and
     entered in force in December 1964. Turkey and the EU formed a customs union in 1995.

     1.3.    Relations between the EU and Turkey

     Accession negotiations with Turkey continued. During the preparatory analytical phase the
     level of preparedness to start negotiations on individual chapters has been assessed on the


     1
            The rapporteur for Turkey was Ms Oomen Ruijten.
     2
            Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2008-2009.



EN                                                    4                                               EN
      basis of screening reports. Of a total of 33 screening reports, one has still to be delivered by
     the Commission to the Council whilst nine are being discussed in the Council.

     So far, negotiations have been opened on eight chapters (Enterprise and industry, Statistics,
     Financial Control, Trans-European Networks, Consumer and health protection, Intellectual
     property law, Company law) one of which (science and research) was provisionally closed. In
     addition, the EU informed Turkey about the progress needed to reach a satisfactory level of
     preparedness to start negotiations on eleven chapters. The December 2006 Council decision3
     remains in force.

     The enhanced political dialogue between the EU and Turkey has continued. Political
     dialogue meetings were held in May and September 2008 at ministerial level and in February
     and July 2008 at political director level. These meetings focused on the main challenges faced
     by Turkey in terms of the Copenhagen political criteria and reviewed progress being made
     towards fulfilment of Accession Partnership priorities. Foreign policy issues related to
     regional areas of common interest to the EU and Turkey, such as Iraq, Iran, the Middle East
     and the Caucasus, were also regularly discussed.

     The EC-Turkey customs union contributed to a further increase in bilateral EU-Turkey trade,
     which was nearly € 100 billion in 2006, thereby making Turkey the EU's seventh trading
     partner. The EU asked Turkey to remove all remaining restrictions on the free movement of
     goods, including restrictions on means of transport regarding Cyprus. A number of Turkey’s
     commitments on technical barriers to trade, import licences, State aid and enforcement of
     intellectual property rights remain unfulfilled. No progress can be reported concerning
     Turkey's longstanding ban on imports of live bovine animals, beef and other animal products.

     The EU provides guidance to the authorities on reform priorities through the Accession
     Partnership. The Council adopted a revised version of the Accession Partnership in February
     2008. Progress on these reform priorities is encouraged and monitored through the bodies set
     up under the Association Agreement. The Association Committee met in March 2008, the
     Association Council in May 2008. Eight sectoral sub-committees have been held since
     November 2006.

     Turkey has not pursued the negotiations on a readmission agreement with the European
     Community since December 2006.

     As regards financial assistance, some € 540 million have been earmarked for Turkey from
     the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (IPA) in 2008. The Multi-Annual Indicative
     Planning Document 2008-2010, which provides the strategic multi-annual framework for all
     programmes at national level, was adopted by the Commission on 25 July 2008. In addition,
     Turkey is benefiting from a series of regional and horizontal programmes under IPA.

     In relation to IPA preparations, Turkey's focus in the last year has been on finalisation of the
     first set of programmes under all components, the negotiation of a Framework Agreement
     with the Commission and preparations for the setting up of implementation systems. Delays
     have occurred in these preparations, which put some of the IPA 2007 programme allocations


     3
            The decision sets out that negotiations will not be opened on eight chapters relevant to Turkey's
            restrictions regarding the Republic of Cyprus and no chapter will be provisionally closed until the
            Commission confirms that Turkey has fully implemented the Additional Protocol to the Association
            Agreement.



EN                                                      5                                                         EN
      at risk. Turkey needs to vigorously address remaining system weakness findings and to
     further improve the quality and efficiency of the project and programme cycles.


     2.       POLITICAL CRITERIA

     This section examines progress made by Turkey towards meeting the Copenhagen political
     criteria, which require stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human
     rights and respect for and protection of minorities. It also monitors the respect for
     international obligations, regional cooperation, and good neighbourly relations with
     enlargement countries and Member States.

     2.1.     Democracy and the rule of law

     On 14 March 2008 the Chief Public Prosecutor applied to the Constitutional Court for the
     governing AK party to be dissolved and for 71 former and present party officials, including
     the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister, to be banned from being member of a
     political party for five years. The charges brought against the party alleged that it was a focal
     point for anti-secular activities. On 30 July, the Constitutional Court fell short of the required
     majority to close down the party, but considered that the latter had carried out activities
     against the secular principles of the Republic. It thus ordered that 50% of the government
     funds due in 2008 be cut off. (See also section on freedom of association).

     Pursuant to Articles 68 and 69 of the Constitution and to the relevant provisions of the Law on
     political parties, on 16 November 2007 the Chief Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation
     applied to the Constitutional Court for closure of the Democratic Society Party (DTP). He
     also requested that 221 former and present members of the party be banned from being
     member of a political party for five years. The party is accused of engaging in activities
     against the unity and integrity of the country. This case is pending before the Constitutional
     Court.

     An investigation started in 2007 into an allegedly criminal network, known as Ergenekon, led
     to the arrest of a number of people, including retired Army generals. The indictment against
     Ergenekon, presented on 14 July 2008 by the Istanbul Public Prosecutor Office, is based on
     charges such as forming a terrorist organisation and attempting to overthrow the government
     and to undermine its operation by use of violent means. During the course of the
     investigation, there were reports regarding the insufficient safeguarding of the rights of
     defence and the excessive duration of detention period without indictment. The first hearing
     of the trial, first of this kind on such a scale, was held as planned on 20 October.

     Constitution

     The governing party gave a group of academics a mandate to revise the 1982 Constitution
     with a view, among other things, to aligning Turkey with international standards on
     fundamental rights.

     However, no draft has been presented either to the public or to parliament, and no clear
     timetable has been set for discussing it.

     Instead, in February 2008, the Parliament amended Article 10 ("Equality before the law") and
     Article 42 ("Right and duty of training and education") of the Constitution, with the aim of
     lifting the headscarf ban for university students. The amendments were adopted with the


EN                                                   6                                                    EN
      support of the governing Justice and Development Party (AKP) and of the opposition
     Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) and Democratic Society Party (DTP).

     Following an appeal by the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) and Democratic Left
     Party (DSP), on 5 June 2008 the Constitutional Court annulled the amendments on the
     grounds that they were against the secular nature of the State. A minority of two judges
     argued that the Court can only examine constitutional amendments with regard to their form
     and not their content.

     Parliament

     The Parliament - the Turkish Grand National Assembly - adopted 116 bills. Since October
     2007 the government submitted 397 draft bills, while 313 were submitted by individual
     members of Parliament.

     In March 2008 an amendment to the Law on elections and electoral rolls was adopted,
     extending the right of Turkish citizens living abroad to participate in parliamentary elections,
     in line with the recommendations of the OSCE Election Monitoring Report.

     However, in response to an appeal filed by the CHP, the Constitutional Court ruled in May
     that the possibility of postal voting is unconstitutional. The CHP referred to the Constitutional
     Court a total of 16 laws adopted in 2008, some of which were intended to introduce EU-
     related democratisation reforms (including, for example, the law on Foundations and the
     amendments to the Law on the public service broadcaster).

     President

     The new President has exerted efforts to play a conciliatory role with regard to political actors
     and civil society. He established a good working relationship with the government, while
     repeatedly calling for an acceleration of the pace of EU-related reforms.

     He played an active role in foreign policy and travelled extensively abroad. In September
     2008, at the invitation of the Armenian President, he paid the first-ever visit by a Turkish
     President to Armenia, with a view to establishing a bilateral dialogue leading to the
     normalisation of bilateral relations.

     Government

     The government expressed its commitment to the EU accession process and to political
     reforms.

     However, despite its strong political mandate, the government did not put forward a consistent
     and comprehensive programme of political reforms. On 1 September 2008 the Government
     announced a draft National Programme for the Adoption of the Acquis, and started a
     consultation process with civil society and the opposition. The Programme remains to be
     adopted. The staff and resources of the Secretariat General for EU Affairs (EUSG), the main
     coordinating body in charge of EU affairs, remain weak.

     As regards local government, Parliament adopted a Law on municipalities in March 2008.
     This Law established 43 new districts, merged 239 municipalities and closed down 863 of
     them. In July 2008, Parliament adopted a Law to increase the revenue of local Governments,




EN                                                  7                                                    EN
      aimed at enabling them to fulfil their mandate more effectively. The implementation of local
     administration laws and capacity-building has continued.

     However, the Law on municipalities adopted in March 2008 is still under review in the
     Constitutional Court, following the appeal by the CHP. There has been no progress regarding
     the adoption of the Framework Law on public administration, which aimed at devolving more
     powers to local Government.

     City councils, which are designed to be a platform to enhance citizens' participation in local
     government, have been functioning effectively in only a limited number of cities. Efforts are
     needed to strengthen all city councils. Accountability systems and transparency also need to
     be strengthened.

     Overall, as concerns the legislative and executive functions, while the new President played a
     positive role by calling for further political reforms, the government did not put forward a
     consistent and comprehensive programme of political and constitutional reforms.
     Furthermore, the lack of dialogue and spirit of compromise between the main political parties
     had a negative impact on the smooth functioning of the political institutions. The work of the
     newly elected parliament was affected to a considerable extent by legal cases aimed at
     dissolution of two parties. As regards local government, the recently adopted local
     administration laws need to be implemented and decentralisation of powers in favour of local
     governments to be strengthened.

     Public administration

     As part of the efforts to reduce red tape, the government issued a circular in May 2008
     instructing all public agencies to use the ID shared data base (KPS) for residence and birth
     records of citizens, instead of requesting them from citizens. The current recruitment and
     promotion procedure (up to mid-career level) is based on a merit-based competitive
     examination, managed by an autonomous body.

     However, the politicisation of senior level appointments has been criticised. As regards the
     reform of public administration, a number of issues remain to be addressed, such as reducing
     administrative burden, ensuring simplification, establishing regulatory impact assessments
     (RIA), developing administrative procedures, enhancing transparency and improving policy-
     making and coordination systems.

     Strategy development units, which are pillars of financial management and policy-making,
     need to be strengthened. Efforts are needed to secure full implementation of the Public
     Financial Management and Control Law.

     Parliament has not received a comprehensive draft law on the Civil Service.

     Overall, there has been limited progress on public administration reform. The civil service
     system needs to be modernised.

     Civilian oversight of the security forces

     Political control over the military was applied in practice in the context of military operations
     aimed at terrorist targets in Northern Iraq. Such operations were authorised by the parliament
     and decided upon by the government.



EN                                                  8                                                    EN
      However, the armed forces have continued to exercise significant political influence via
     formal and informal mechanisms. Senior members of the armed forces have expressed their
     opinion on domestic and foreign policy issues going beyond their remit, including on Cyprus,
     the South East, secularism, political parties and other non-military developments.

     No change has been made to the Turkish Armed Forces Internal Service Law and the Law on
     the National Security Council. These define the role and duties of the Turkish military and
     grant the military wide room for manoeuvre by providing a broad definition of national
     security. No progress has been made on enhancing civilian control over the Gendarmerie
     when engaged in law enforcement activities.

     An internal military memorandum leaked to the press identified NGOs that had received
     financial aid from foreign organisations, including the EU. The memorandum was not denied
     by the General Staff.

     The 1997 EMASYA secret protocol on security, public order and assistance units remains in
     force unchanged. The protocol allows military operations to be carried out for internal
     security matters under certain conditions without a request from the civilian authorities.

     No progress has been made on strengthening parliamentary oversight of the military budget
     and expenditure. The Parliamentary Planning and Budget Committee reviews the budget of
     the Ministry of National Defence. However, extra-budgetary funds are excluded from
     parliamentary scrutiny. The Defence Industry Support Fund (SSDF), from which most
     procurement projects are funded, is still an extra-budgetary fund.

     As regards auditing, under the Constitution the Court of Auditors can carry out external ex-
     post audits of military expenditure. In 2007, some 25% of all military accountancy offices
     were audited. In July 2008, the Court of Auditors decided that it has a mandate to audit the
     SSDF. However, the Court remains unable to audit assets belonging to the military, pending
     adoption of the revised legislation on the Court of Auditors, which is overdue. Furthermore,
     the 2003 Law on public financial management and control, which provides for internal audits
     of security institutions, has yet to be properly implemented

     Overall, no progress has been made in ensuring full civilian supervisory functions over the
     military and parliamentary oversight of defence expenditure. Senior members of the armed
     forces have made statements on issues going beyond their remit.

     Judicial system

     The Ministry of Justice has been working on a draft judicial reform strategy, which it
     presented in spring 2008. The document is comprehensive and covers issues related to the
     independence, impartiality, efficiency and effectiveness of the judiciary, enhancement of its
     professionalism, the management system and measures to enhance confidence in the
     judiciary, to facilitate access to justice and to improve the penitentiary system. Judges and
     prosecutors discussed the draft strategy at a meeting in Antalya.

     In 2007, a total of 846 judges and prosecutors were appointed. The total number of judges and
     prosecutors on 1 May 2008 was 6,914 (6,785 on 1 May 2007) and 3,917 (3,744 on 1 May
     2007) respectively. On the same date, the total number of vacant posts for judges and
     prosecutors was 4,166. The funds available to the judiciary in 2007 totalled € 865 million.




EN                                                9                                                  EN
      This covers salaries and social security payments for all members of the judiciary, plus
     services and real estate acquisition for the judiciary.

     However, there have been no developments on establishment of the regional courts of appeal.
     This is a matter of concern. Under the law, these should have been operational by June 2007.
     In addition, there is a need to strengthen efforts to ensure that interpretation by the judiciary of
     legislation related to human rights and fundamental freedoms is in line with the ECHR, with
     the case-law of ECtHR and with article 90 of the Turkish Constitution.

     Concerns remain about the impartiality of the judiciary. On some occasions senior members
     of the judiciary made public political comments which may compromise their impartiality in
     future cases. As regards independence, there has been no progress on the composition of the
     High Council of Judges and Prosecutors4 or on the reporting lines of judicial inspectors5 (See
     also Chapter 23 – Judiciary and fundamental rights).

     The Şemdinli case was transferred to the Van military court following a decision of the Court
     of Cassation6. The Van military court ordered the release – pending trial – of the accused.

     Other high-profile cases underlined the importance of the quality of the investigation. This
     pointed to the need to improve the institutional relationship between, on the one hand, the
     police and the gendarmerie and, on the other, the judiciary.

     Overall, the work to date on the draft judicial reform strategy has been a positive
     development. The Ministry of Justice needs to continue and expand the consultations with all
     stakeholders, including civil society, and build the necessary broad support for the strategy.
     However, concerns remain as regards the independence and impartiality of the judiciary..
     Reforms in the area of the judiciary are a priority of the Accession Partnership.

     Anti-corruption policy

     Turkey has implemented one third of the recommendations made in GRECO's 2005 joint first
     and second round evaluation report. It has made efforts to ensure practical implementation of
     the existing anti-corruption legislation, inter alia by enhancing training on corruption
     detection and investigation for law enforcement officers, establishing guidelines on seizure
     and confiscation and developing systems for monitoring the impact of anti-corruption
     measures.



     4
            The composition of the High Council is not representative of the judiciary as a whole: only senior
            members of the judiciary from the Court of Cassation and the Council of State are members of this
            Council.
     5
            The judicial inspectors, who are responsible for evaluating the performance of judges and prosecutors,
            are attached to the Ministry rather than to the High Council.
     6
            This case concerns the bombing in November 2005 that killed one person and injured others in the town
            of Şemdinli in Southeast Turkey. The prosecutor on the case published the indictment in March 2006.
            The indictment included also accusations against high-ranking military commanders. The General Staff
            criticised the indictment and urged those bearing constitutional responsibility to take action. In April
            2006, the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors dismissed from office the Şemdinli prosecutor. The
            disproportionate character of this decision raised questions on the independence of the High Council
            form other state institutions. A first instance civil court sentenced the accused - two non-commissioned
            officers and a PKK informant - to a total of thirty-nine (39) years of imprisonment. On appeal, the
            Court of Cassation ruled that the offences had not been properly constituted and that the case falls under
            the jurisdiction of the military court.



EN                                                        10                                                             EN
      However, the Government failed to prepare a comprehensive anti-corruption strategy. Policy
     making in this field has not received adequate political support.

     Furthermore, several of GRECO's most important recommendations have not been addressed,
     such as the recommendation to entrust an oversight body, involving civil society, with the
     responsibility of overseeing implementation of national anti-corruption strategies and of
     proposing new strategies.

     Corruption incidents, involving in particular real estate agencies, local government and
     universities, were frequently reported by the media. As a result, law enforcement agencies
     have conducted a series of high-profile corruption investigations in various agencies. In the
     context of a fraud case against the charity association Deniz Feneri in Germany, the Regional
     Court of Frankfurt am Main convicted three charity’s managers for having misused funds
     collected as donations. The Court also stated that part of the funds have been channelled to
     entities based in Turkey. In this context, an Ankara prosecutor initiated an investigation, and
     asked the Ministry of Justice to request the necessary documents from the German Court.

     There has been no progress on limiting the immunity of Members of Parliament and there is
     no legislation in place on election campaign financing. The European Court of Human Rights
     noted in a ruling that that no objective criteria had been set to define the conditions under
     which immunity could be lifted7.

     No progress has been made regarding new legislation on the Court of Auditors. There has
     been no progress on strengthening Parliamentary oversight over public expenditure.

     Overall, there has been limited progress in the area of anti-corruption. Corruption remains a
     widespread issue. There has been limited progress towards strengthening the legal framework
     and institutional set-up to fight corruption. The continuing absence of an overall strategy,
     action plan and coordination mechanism is a cause for continuing concern in this area. Turkey
     needs to develop a track record of investigations, prosecutions and indictments of allegations
     of corruption.

     (See also Chapter 23 – Judiciary and fundamental rights)

     2.2.    Human rights and the protection of minorities

     Observance of international human rights law

     There have been no developments as regards ratification of human rights instruments. The
     Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against Torture (OPCAT), signed in September
     2005, has not been ratified. The ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
     with Disabilities is pending. Turkey has not ratified three additional Protocols to the European
     Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)8.

     During the reporting period, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) delivered a
     total of 266 judgments finding that Turkey had violated the ECHR. Similarly to last year, the
     total number of new applications to the ECtHR continued to increase, with 3,705 applications
     during the reporting period. The majority of these new applications concerned the right to a


     7
            Kart v. Turkey (Application 8917/05).
     8
            Protocols n° 4, n° 7 and n° 12.



EN                                                  11                                                  EN
      fair trial and protection of property rights. Few of them concerned violations of the right to
     life or torture and ill-treatment.

     Turkey abided by the final judgment of the ECtHR in the majority of cases. However, a
     considerable number of ECtHR judgments are awaiting enforcement by Turkey. This is
     sometimes because general legislative measures are required. For instance, the legal provision
     preventing the re-opening of domestic proceedings in certain circumstances following a
     judgment by the ECtHR remains in force. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of
     Europe indicated that continuation of this situation amounts to a manifest breach of Turkey's
     obligation under the ECHR. Furthermore, Turkey has not adopted legal measures to prevent
     repetitive prosecution and conviction of conscientious objectors. Other cases pending before
     the Committee of Ministers awaiting adoption of the necessary implementing measures relate
     to control of the activities of security forces, effective remedies against abuses and restrictions
     on freedom of expression.

     In the Cyprus v. Turkey case, the issue of missing persons and the restrictions on the property
     rights of Greek Cypriots living permanently in the northern part of Cyprus remain pending.
     The compensation mechanism put in place to address the property rights of displaced persons
     fulfils in principle the requirements indicated by the ECtHR and has continued to receive
     requests for compensation. On 22 April 2008 the Court welcomed settlement in the case of
     Eugenia Michaelidou Developments Ltd and Michael Tymvios v. Turkey brokered by the
     Turkish Cypriot Immovable Property Commission, which provides for the payment of USD 1
     million and a property exchange. However, the ECtHR has not assessed whether the available
     remedy is effective for all relevant issues. Turkey has not yet fully implemented the ECtHR
     judgements on the Loizidou and Xenides-Arestis cases.

     Overall, Turkey has continued to make progress on the execution of ECtHR judgments.
     However, further efforts are needed in this context. Furthermore, there has been no progress
     on ratification of international human rights instruments, including in particular OPCAT.

     Several State-sponsored bodies have the task of ensuring the promotion and enforcement of
     human rights. These include the Human Rights Presidency under the Prime Minister's office
     and the Human Rights Boards (931 in all). The latter have the task of visiting places of
     detention and State-sponsored social services.

     At parliament level, the Human Rights Investigation Committee has established two sub-
     committees to investigate torture and ill-treatment in prisons and detention centres and the
     murder of journalist Hrant Dink. The latter Commission finalised its report in July 2008. The
     report came to the conclusion that there was negligence, error and lack of co-ordination in the
     activities of the security organisations and of the gendarmerie in failing to prevent the murder.
     These findings need to be properly followed-up.

     The institutional framework for human rights promotion and enforcement does not meet the
     independence requirement and lacks financial autonomy and transparency. There is a need for
     greater public awareness of the work of these institutions. The Human Rights Advisory Board
     – a body representing NGOs, experts and ministries – has not been operating since the
     publication of a report on minority rights in October 2004.

     Furthermore, the establishment of the Ombudsman has been outstanding since 2006,
     following the application of former President Sezer to the Constitutional Court for the
     annulment of some provisions of the Law. The Constitutional Court suspended the entry into



EN                                                   12                                                    EN
      force of the Law pending its final ruling. In the absence of an Ombudsman system, there is no
     alternative remedy, other than the judiciary, for investigating complaints against
     administrative decisions at central and local level, as regards the respect of human rights,
     liberties, law and justice. The establishment of a scrutiny mechanism via the Ombudsman
     would help defuse tensions between different sections of society by strengthening the rule of
     law and the protection of individual rights.

     Human rights defenders have faced criminal proceedings because of their work. Some faced
     threats from extremist groups, and were subsequently placed under police protection.

     Overall, the institutions for the promotion and enforcement of human rights lack
     independence and resources. The introduction of an Ombudsman is overdue and is of key
     importance to prevent tensions in society. Furthermore, threats to personal safety and
     occasional criminal proceedings have an adverse effect on the work of human rights
     defenders.

     Civil and political rights

     The rights of detainees are protected by a comprehensive set of safeguards which serve to
     prevent cases of torture and ill-treatment in custody. This includes medical examinations of
     detainees in police custody. Efforts are ongoing to ensure compliance with these provisions.
     They include training for judges, prosecutors and forensic experts with a view to better
     implementation of the Istanbul Protocol, which provides guidance on effective investigation
     and documentation of torture and ill-treatment cases.

     The Ministry of Interior continued its work for the establishment of an independent national
     mechanism to investigate citizens' complaints against law enforcement officers. As a next step
     the establishment of this mechanism requires public consultations on its structure and
     function.

     The Council of Forensic Medicine is preparing for ISO quality accreditation, which will
     enhance the credibility of its reports. The Council has seven branch offices, and efforts are
     ongoing to increase the resources for forensic medicine in the country through the creation of
     units in each of Turkey's 81 provinces.

     However, the number of applications to NGOs in relation to cases of torture and ill-treatment
     has increased, in particular outside official places of detention, notably during apprehension,
     transfer, or in the open with no detention registered. Furthermore, there are cases where the
     legal safeguards in place failed to prevent or stop the occurrence of torture and ill-treatment
     while in custody or in prison. These developments are a matter of concern.

     Amendments to the law on the duties and legal powers of the police, adopted in 2007, provide
     that the police are not entitled to use force unless confronted with resistance. These
     amendments, together with the instructions given to members of the security forces, appear to
     align the Turkish legislation with the ECHR standards. However, there are concerns that the
     implementation of this law has resulted in cases of ill-treatment during routine identity
     checks. Strict implementation of the amended provisions needs to be monitored by the
     Turkish authorities in order to prevent human right violations.

     Pending the ratification of OPCAT (see Ratification of international human rights
     instruments), that requests Parties to designate or establish an independent national preventive



EN                                                 13                                                   EN
      mechanism for monitoring places of detention, there is no such mechanism in place. Visits by
     the Human Rights Boards are often not followed up and the boards do not have sufficient
     expertise.

     The use of statements obtained in the absence of legal counsel or not confirmed before a
     judge is prohibited by the Criminal Procedure Code. However, the Court of Cassation ruled
     that the ban on use of such statements does not apply retroactively. There have been cases
     where lower courts have not removed such evidence from the case file, although allegations
     of ill-treatment were made by the defendant.

     Medical reports established upon admission to and exit from police custody are sometimes
     inaccurate due to lack of resources or expertise. Furthermore, for their own security, the legal
     framework allows doctors to request the presence of a law enforcement officer during medical
     examinations of detainees. However, in some reported cases, law enforcement officers were
     present during examinations without the request of the doctor in charge.

     Victims of torture and ill-treatment rely essentially on rehabilitation services provided by
     NGOs. This is partly due to the lack or inaccessibility of State-sponsored services for victims
     of torture and ill-treatment.

     As concerns impunity, the Minister of Justice expressed a public apology for a recent case of
     death following torture in detention. However, impunity for human rights violations is a cause
     for concern. There is a lack of prompt, impartial and independent investigation into
     allegations of human rights violations by members of security forces. None of the 70
     complaints submitted to the prosecutor in relation to the Diyarbakir incidents in March 2006
     have been closed so far. Furthermore, judicial proceedings into allegations of torture and ill-
     treatment are often delayed by the lack of efficient trial procedures or abuse of such
     procedures.

     Overall, there have been limited efforts as regards the prevention of torture and ill-treatment.
     A comprehensive set of safeguards is in place. However, allegations of torture and ill-
     treatment during detention or outside official places of detention are a cause for concern. The
     efforts to prevent torture and ill-treatment need to be enhanced. The ratification of the
     OPCAT and the fight against impunity are key in this context.

     As regards access to justice, reports indicate that in urban areas most detainees have access to
     a lawyer immediately after detention. In rural areas, however, in particular in the South-East
     of the country, there have been cases where defendants have not had access to a lawyer on
     terms equivalent to those in urban areas.

     As regards prison conditions, the physical infrastructure of prisons continued to improve.
     Twelve new prisons have been completed and a further 22 new prisons are under
     construction.

     Staff training continued to improve. There are four prison staff training centres, which deliver
     pre-service, in-service and promotion training. The trainers have been trained under the EU's
     judicial modernisation and penal reform (JMPR) programme.

     Greater transparency was introduced to the operations of the Penal Institutions and Detention
     Houses Monitoring Boards. These boards carry out regular visits to prisons and the findings
     of their reports are now publicly accessible. Furthermore, the Law provides for the publication



EN                                                 14                                                   EN
      of an annual report on the activities of the Penal Institutions and Detention Houses
     Monitoring Boards.

     However, the national framework for prison monitoring falls short of the requirements of the
     OPCAT (see Torture and ill-treatment).

     Restrictions on prisoners' correspondence and inadequate health/psychiatric resources remain
     a problem. The total number of prisoners is 95,551 for a total prison capacity of 90,558.
     Prisons in big cities are especially faced with the problem of overcrowding. Implementation
     of the circular on high-security F-type prisons has failed to remedy the shortcomings as
     regards communal activities for inmates. Proper implementation of the circular depends on
     increasing the numbers and training of staff, and making more rooms available for the
     activities of different groups of prisoners.

     Provisions allowing solitary confinement of persons sentenced to aggravated life
     imprisonment remain in force. In its 2006 report on Turkey, the Council of Europe Committee
     for the Prevention of Torture indicated that such rules need to be applied for as short a time as
     possible and must be based on an individual risk assessment of the prisoner concerned.

     Cases of ill-treatment by prison staff have been reported, but few lawsuits have been launched
     to probe these allegations.

     Overall, good progress was made on improving infrastructures and on training of staff.
     However, shortcomings as regards restrictions on prisoners' conditions, on solitary
     confinement and on occasional ill-treatment remain to be addressed.

     Open debate continues in the Turkish media on a wide range of issues, including those
     perceived as sensitive by Turkish society. In April, the Turkish parliament adopted
     amendments to Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code with the intention of strengthening
     the safeguards for freedom of expression in Turkey. The amendments changed the wording
     of the article9, lowered the upper limit of the penalty and abolished the higher penalty for
     insults in a foreign country. Furthermore, the amendments introduce a requirement for
     permission to be obtained from the Justice Minister in order to launch a criminal
     investigation. A circular on implementation of the amended article was issued on 9 May
     200810.

     Following the adoption of the amendments to Article 301, Turkish courts had forwarded, by
     September, 257 cases to the Minister of Justice for prior authorisation. This requirement

     9
              The amended article 301 reads as follows:
     1. A person who publicly degrades the Turkish nation, the State of the Republic of Turkey, the Turkish Grand
              National Assembly, the Government of the Republic of Turkey and the judicial bodies of the State,
              shall be sentenced to a penalty of imprisonment for a term of six months to two years
     2. A person who publicly degrades the military or security organisations of the State shall be sentenced to a
              penalty in accordance with the first section
     3. The expression of an opinion for the purpose of criticism does not constitute an offence.
     4. The conduct of investigation for such offence shall be subject to the permission of the Minister of Justice.
     10
              The circular referred to the relevant case law of the ECtHR on freedom of expression and pointed out
              that international conventions on human rights automatically become part of the Turkish legal order -
              without any additional legislative steps for transposition - once they have been adopted by the
              Parliament. Furthermore, the circular establishes, that for offences against Article 301, statements
              cannot be taken from the suspect without permission from the Minister of Justice in order not to
              discredit the suspect in the eyes of the public.



EN                                                        15                                                           EN
      concerns cases at the investigation stage or for which judicial proceedings have started. By
     September, the Minister had reviewed 163 cases and refused to grant permission to proceed in
     126 cases.

     However, the wording of Article 301 remains largely the same and the prior authorisation
     requirement opens up the possibility that the article will become subject to political
     consideration. So far, the Minister of Justice authorised the criminal investigations to continue
     in 37 cases. This includes one case which was initiated following a statement made by a
     Turkish writer on the Armenian issue shortly after the assassination of the Turkish journalist
     of Armenian origin, Hrant Dink. Furthermore, there is legal uncertainty as regards cases
     which had been granted authorisation by the Minister of Justice under the former Article 159
     of the Turkish Criminal Code.

     Other legal provisions that restrict freedom of expression remain a cause of concern. For
     example, Articles 215, 216 and 217 of the Turkish Criminal Code, that criminalise offences
     against public order, and the Anti-Terror Law have been applied to prosecute and convict
     those expressing non-violent opinions on Kurdish issues. Turkish judges and prosecutors
     apply a wide interpretation of the provision on "incitement to violence" or "public interest", in
     particular as concerns Kurdish-related issues. This is not in line with the ECtHR case law on
     freedom of expression and implies in particular a lack of differentiation between violent and
     non-violent opinions. Moreover, press articles on ongoing judicial proceedings have led to
     prosecutions and convictions under Article 288 (attempt to influence a fair trial) of the
     Turkish Criminal Code or under the Press Law. Similarly, public statements on the right to
     conscientious objection are prosecuted under Article 318 (discouraging the people from
     military service) of the Turkish Criminal Code.

     Furthermore, there have been statements by senior figures strongly criticising the press, in
     particular following press reports on alleged corruption cases and the fight against terrorism.
     Another problematic area is the frequent website bans, which are disproportionate in scope
     and duration. Along with other websites, the popular You Tube site has been closed down
     several times.

     The Turkish Armed Forces still deny access to military receptions and briefings to some
     journalists and media organisations.

     The case against 53 DTP mayors for sending a letter to the Danish Prime Minister requesting
     that Roj TV not be closed was finalised in April 2008. The Court sentenced the defendants to
     2 months and 15 days imprisonment, which was commuted to a fine. The Court's ruling
     cannot be appealed.

     Overall, with the amendment of Article 301 there has been some progress in the efforts to
     strengthen the safeguards for freedom of expression, which is a priority of the Accession
     Partnership. However, only a consistent track record of implementation will show whether or
     not the revised article is adequate. Moreover, further legislative reforms are needed to ensure
     full respect of freedom of expression, in law and in practice, in line with the ECHR and the
     ECtHR case law. Against the background of pressures on the press and electronic media,
     there is a need to guarantee an atmosphere conducive to full respect of the freedom of the
     press.

     The legal framework for freedom of assembly is broadly in line with European standards.




EN                                                  16                                                   EN
      However, as regards implementation, arbitrary limitations have been applied in practice to the
     right to peaceful assembly. The Turkish police used disproportionate force against protestors
     and trade union representatives who ignored the ban on 1 May demonstrations in Taksim
     Square in Istanbul. The Kurdish Newroz Spring celebrations in March 2008 resulted in
     violence against demonstrators in several provinces, in particular Hakkari, Yuksekova and
     Van. Three citizens died during the course of the Newroz demonstrations in Van.
     Investigation files are pending on the circumstances of these deaths in the Van Chief Public
     Prosecution Office.

     Investigations have been initiated into the allegations of disproportionate use of force by the
     police during demonstrations. However, in such cases, the opening of a criminal case depends
     on the authorisation of the Governor. In certain cases, the authorisation has been refused for
     lack of conclusive evidence, against the findings of prior investigations. Furthermore, some
     protestors who allege police ill-treatment during demonstrations have faced criminal charges.
     The criminal investigation into the cases of disproportionate force by the police during the 1
     May 2007 demonstrations in Istanbul resulted in charges being pressed against two police
     officers. However, the parallel disciplinary investigation was closed without any
     administrative sanction against the police officers on duty during the demonstrations.

     Overall, further efforts are needed to ensure freedom of assembly in practice in line with
     European standards, as arbitrary limitations and disproportionate use of force against
     demonstrators still occur.

     As regards freedom of association, the legal framework further improved with the adoption
     of the amendments to the Law on foundations in February 2008. The scope of the new Law
     extends to all existing foundations. The new provisions relax the conditions for establishing a
     foundation and ease the regulatory framework for their activities, in particular on selecting
     board members, acquiring or selling assets, receiving funds from abroad and co-operating
     with foreign foundations. The previous ban on foreigners establishing foundations in Turkey
     has been replaced by the principle of reciprocity. The new Law provides tax incentives for
     donations to all foundations and allows tax exemptions for the repair, restoration and
     landscaping of cultural properties that belong to foundations. Furthermore, the Law provides
     for the establishment of the Foundations Council as the highest decision-making body for
     foundations. As a positive step, the foundations themselves are represented in this new body.

     However, the obligations imposed by the Law on associations to notify the authorities before
     receiving financial support from abroad and to provide detailed documents on such support
     continue to place a burden on associations' operations. Furthermore, frequent inspections of
     NGOs receiving funds from abroad, including EC funds, remain a cause of concern. Certain
     NGO activities were videotaped by the security forces, especially in East and Southeast
     Turkey.

     The registration of the Turkish Armenian Business Development Council was rejected by the
     Governorate of Istanbul, without clear legal grounds. Following a case brought by the Istanbul
     Governorate, an Istanbul court decided in May to close down a lesbian, gay, bisexual,
     transgender/transsexual (LGBTT) association. The Istanbul Governorate is accusing Amnesty
     International (AI) of illegal money collection. The competent Istanbul Administrative Court
     heard the case and decided in favour of AI. The Governor has appealed the case before the
     Council of State.




EN                                                 17                                                  EN
      As regards political parties, the closure cases against the AKP and the DTP (see section on
     Parliament) illustrate that the current legal provisions applicable to political parties do not
     provide political actors with an adequate level of protection from the state's interference in
     their freedom of association and freedom of expression.

     Overall, there were improvements to the legal framework on freedom of association.
     However, some associations faced disproportionate administrative difficulties or judicial
     proceedings. Furthermore, in the light of the recurrent closure cases against political parties,
     the legal provisions on political parties need to be amended in line with the case law of the
     ECtHR and best practices in EU Member States, as outlined by the Council of Europe's
     Venice Commission. This is a priority of the Accession Partnership.

     As regards civil society organisations, governmental bodies regularly consult NGOs.
     However, there is no coherent legal framework organising this cooperation. As a result,
     consultations are held on an ad hoc basis, with unclear selection criteria, and do not result in
     tangible policy outputs. Political pluralism would be enhanced if participation of civil society
     and other stakeholders in policy-making were increased. Furthermore, the breadth and scope
     of civil society organisations needs to be strengthened.

     As concerns freedom of religion, freedom of worship continues to be generally respected.
     The Law on foundations adopted in February 2008 addresses, among other things, a number
     of property issues regarding non-Muslim minorities (See Right to property and Freedom of
     association).

     The court case on the killing of three Protestants in Malatya in April 2007 continued. A
     leading defence lawyer was provided with protection after receiving threats. A limited number
     of court decisions have ruled against use of threats or insults against representatives of non-
     Muslim minorities.

     As regards the Alevis, the government announced an initiative aimed at improving dialogue
     with this community and addressing its concerns. In what was noted as a first decision of its
     kind in the country, a municipal council recognised a Cem house as a place of worship and
     applied mosque tariffs to its water charges.

     However, the government's initiative has not been followed through. Overall, Alevis continue
     to face the same problems as before, in particular as regards education and places of worship.
     This has led an AKP Alevi MP to resign from the position of Advisor to the Prime Minister
     on Alevi issues.

     As regards education, under Article 24 of the Turkish Constitution religious culture and ethics
     classes are compulsory in the curricula of primary and secondary education. This was not the
     case previously, i.e. before the entry into force of the current Constitution in 1982. In October
     2007, further to an application lodged by a family who are followers of Alevism, the ECtHR
     11
        found that these classes did not just give a general overview of religions but provided
     specific instruction in the major principles of the Muslim faith, including its cultural rites. The
     Court requested Turkey to bring its educational system and domestic legislation into
     conformity with Article 2 of Protocol No1 to the ECHR. This ECtHR judgment needs to be
     implemented. In August 2008 an Alevi Federation applied to the Committee of Ministers of


     11
            Hasan and Eylem Zengin v. Turkey case (Application 1448/04).



EN                                                     18                                                  EN
      the Council of Europe complaining that this judgment is not being implemented and claiming
     that the new textbooks include superficial information on Alevis part of which could also be
     considered misleading. In March 2008, in two separate cases, the Council of State (CoS)
     decided that children of Alevi families were entitled to be exempted from these religious
     education classes.

     As regards places of worship, two cases regarding Alevi places of worship (Cem houses or
     Cemevi) are pending before the courts, one of them before the Council of State. In both cases,
     Alevis were refused plots to construct Cem houses. These are not recognised as places of
     worship and, as a result, receive no funding from the authorities. Two Protestant churches and
     a Jehovah's Witnesses assembly have been unable to register their places of worship.

     Attacks against non-Muslim clergy and places of worship have been reported in a number of
     provinces. Missionaries continue to be portrayed and/or perceived as a threat to the integrity
     of the country and to the Muslim religion. The Turkish Alliance of Protestant Churches
     submitted a report to Parliament's Human Rights Committee on the state of religious
     minorities in Turkey. This report pointed out that non-Muslim groups in the country had been
     the targets of attacks, provided a list of such incidents and noted that no suspects had been
     arrested. Implementation of the Ministry of Interior circular of 19 June 2007 on freedom of
     religion of non-Muslim Turkish citizens has not yet had the desired effects.

     Non-Muslim communities – as organised structures of religious groups – still face problems
     due to lack of legal personality. Restrictions on the training of clergy remain. Turkish
     legislation does not provide for private higher religious education for these communities and
     there are no such opportunities in the public education system. The Halki (Heybeliada) Greek
     Orthodox seminary remains closed. There have been reports of foreign clergy who wish to
     work in Turkey facing difficulties in obtaining work permits. The Ecumenical Patriarch is not
     free to use the ecclesiastical title Ecumenical on all occasions. In January 2008, Prime
     Minister Erdogan declared that use of the title "ecumenical" should not be a matter on which
     the State should rule.

     Judicial proceedings against conscientious objectors have continued and there have been
     frequent allegations of ill-treatment of conscientious objectors in prison. Furthermore, public
     statements on the right to conscientious objection have led to convictions (see section on
     freedom of expression and observance of international human rights law).

     Overall, there has been some progress, in particular as regards adoption of the Law on
     foundations. However, the implementation of the Law, together with the resolution of the
     outstanding property-related issues regarding non-Muslim minorities remains a challenge.
     Furthermore, Alevis continue to face the same problems, including on education and places of
     worship. A legal framework in line with the ECHR has yet to be established, so that all non-
     Muslim religious communities and Alevis can function without undue constraints. Turkey
     needs to make further efforts to create an environment conducive to full respect for freedom
     of religion in practice and to carry out consistent initiatives aimed at improving dialogue with
     the various religious communities.

     Economic and social rights

     As regards women's rights, the Prime Ministerial circular on combating honour killings and
     domestic violence against women has helped to improve cooperation between public
     institutions. Awareness-raising activities have been organised for members of the judiciary



EN                                                 19                                                   EN
      and law enforcement bodies. To date, 30 000 law enforcement officers have reportedly
     participated in training with a further 10 000 planned by the end of 2008. Gender sensitivity
     training programmes have also been conducted for health workers. The number of shelters for
     women victims of domestic violence has marginally increased. Courts have applied the
     amended Law on protection of the family12.

     There are some notable examples of high-level presence of women in Turkish society in
     business, academia, the civil service and politics. Parliament adopted the "Employment
     Package" amending the Labour Law and certain other laws in order to promote women's
     employment. (See Chapter 19 – Social policy and employment). The gender gap in primary
     education decreased further to 2.3% (See Children's rights).

     However, gender equality remains a major challenge in Turkey. According to official
     statistics, participation by women in the labour force is low (24.8 % in 2007), and on a
     decreasing trend. The rate of women's employment is the lowest among the EU Member
     States and the OECD countries.

     Political representation of women, at both national and regional levels, is very low. Civil
     society organisations have submitted proposals to address this issue, in particular with a view
     to the forthcoming municipal elections scheduled for 2009.

     Documents posted on the Diyanet's (Presidency for Religious Affairs) site contain language
     perceived by NGOs as discriminatory against women.

     Women's access to education is the lowest among the EU Member States and the OECD
     countries. The good results on reducing the gender gap in primary education need to be
     sustained and strengthened, in particular by ensuring the continuing attendance of girls at
     school and identifying and addressing school drop-outs (see children's rights).

     Domestic violence, honour killings, and early and forced marriages are still a serious problem.
     The Court of Cassation ruled that sentences for honour killings are given only if there is
     evidence showing that the murder was committed following a decision of the family
     assembly. This decision was criticised by a member of the Court, who claimed that it would
     complicate efforts to eradicate these killings. According to the Prime Ministry Human Rights
     Directorate, 220 honour killings were reported in the country in 2007, most of which
     happened in big cities. This is an increase compared with 2006 and illustrates the need to
     target efforts to raise awareness on women's rights among urban migrants. Finally, there is a
     need to improve reliability of data on all these issues.

     Women are reportedly reluctant to have recourse to the police or the courts due to lack of
     confidence in provision of effective protection. Women's economic fragility further reinforces
     this attitude. The Law on municipalities13, in particular the provisions on shelters, are not yet
     fully implemented and the number of shelters remains lower than provided for under that law.
     Women's NGOs are conducting surveys to define the number and capacity of properly



     12
            Amendments have extended the Law to all individuals in the family, including family members living
            separately. They have also abolished all fees for applications and administrative transactions related to
            court proceedings.
     13
            The 2005 Law on municipalities provides for establishment of shelters for women in metropolitan
            municipalities and in municipalities with a population of 50 000 or more.



EN                                                        20                                                            EN
      functioning shelters. NGOs have reported that it is not possible to obtain information about
     the scope or an assessment of the impact of awareness-raising campaigns.

     A Gender Equality Body and a Parliamentary Committee on Gender Equality have still to be
     established. Women's civil society organisations have requested the establishment of a fully-
     fledged committee that could play an essential role in mainstreaming women's issues in all
     policy areas.

     There have been complaints from civil society organisations about the consultations organised
     by the government on the direction and implementation of gender policy. These relate to both
     the limited number of civil society organisations consulted, but also the extent to which
     positions expressed are eventually taken into account.

     Overall, the legal framework guaranteeing women's rights and gender equality is broadly in
     place. However, further significant efforts are needed. To reduce the gap between men and
     women in economic participation and opportunity, educational attainment, access to
     healthcare, and political empowerment. Efforts to prevent honour killings and domestic
     violence have continued. However, these issues remain a serious problem, and efforts need to
     be stepped up.

     With respect to children's rights, there was an increase in net primary school enrolment from
     90% in the 2006/2007 school year to 97% in 2007/200814. Over the same period, the gender
     gap in primary education was halved from 4.6% to 2.3%. The number of pupils in pre-school
     education has increased by 28% over the last three years, from 550,000 in 2005 to 700,000 in
     2007. The government target is to attain a 50% pre-school enrolment rate from the current
     25%. The Ministry of National Education has established an e-school database containing
     information on school attendance. The Ministry can thus identify children that are out of
     school and try to ensure their enrolment or provide catch-up education. In May 2008, the
     Education Board approved the catch-up education programme: this is meant to give a second
     chance to children of 10–14 years of age who either never enrolled or who dropped out. This
     measure is targeted mainly at working and Roma children. In addition, mobile schools are
     trying to reach out to children working in agriculture.

     The proportion of children under 15 years of age in households experiencing poverty
     decreased from 27.7% in 2005 to 25.2% in 2006. The Social Services and Child Protection
     Agency (SHCEK) has collected data on domestic violence and child abuse and on children
     living and working on the streets. However, these data have not yet been made public.

     Minimum standards on care and protection for children living outside parental care have been
     developed, and efforts to strengthen and monitor the parenting system have intensified. The
     new Social Insurance and General Health Insurance Law provides for coverage for every
     citizen under 18 years of age. Parliament has ratified the Hague Convention on the Civil
     Aspects of International Child Abduction, which provides for a simplified procedure for
     returning children to their legal custodian.



     14
            This is partly due to the revised method of calculation of the total population. The Turkish Statistical
            Institute (TURKSTAT) revised its population figures based on its new address-based population
            registration system. Thus, the Ministry of National Education's formal education statistics for 2007-08
            apparently paint the clearest picture yet of enrolment rates at various levels of the school system and of
            the gender gap in access to education.



EN                                                        21                                                             EN
      SHCEK has recruited new members of staff. The number of specialised staff such as
     psychologists, child development experts and sociologists increased during the same period.
     Staff of institutions involved in child care, including members of the judiciary, have been
     trained on juvenile justice. SHCEK has also made efforts to improve the quality of the
     services it provides and has assumed more responsibilities in implementation of the Law on
     child protection. Reception centres have been opened in a number of provinces for children
     who are perpetrators or witnesses of crimes or victims of violence. Six (6) such centres were
     established for the first time in 2007 in accordance with provisions of the Child Protection
     Law. Four (4) of these centres are "Protection, care and rehabilitation centres" and assist
     children involved in criminal activities; two (2) are "Care and social rehabilitation centres"
     and assist child victims of violence and abuse.

     However, respect for and implementation of children's rights continue to be a matter of
     concern. Children out of school remain a problem: the e-school database has revealed that
     approximately 450 000 children between 6 and 14 years of age do not attend school.

     Implementation of minimum standards of care and protection of children living outside
     parental care needs to be improved. SHCEK needs to make the data on domestic violence
     against children and child abuse and on children living and working on the streets publicly
     available in order to improve policy-making and public debate. Efforts to combat child labour
     in the field need to improve and shortcomings in legislation15 must be addressed.

     Despite some progress in the juvenile justice system, the number of child courts is still
     inadequate16, there is a lack of social workers in these courts and their workload is heavy.
     This results in longer trials17 and, thus, possibly in children being deprived of their liberty for
     longer periods of time. There has been an increase in the number of children in detention. The
     conditions in detention centres need to be improved, both in terms of physical conditions and
     as regards the quality of the services provided. The probation system should also be improved
     to prevent recurrence of the offence and to support children and their families.

     Overall, there has been progress on access to education, social services and the juvenile
     justice system. However, efforts need to continue in all areas related to children's rights,
     including administrative capacity, education, the juvenile justice system and child labour.

     As regards socially vulnerable persons and/or persons with disabilities, the State will pay
     the social security premiums for people with disabilities to promote their employment. There
     was an increase in the resources allocated to care services for people with disabilities. A
     circular was issued with a view to immediate placement of people with disabilities who are in
     need of urgent care. As regards mental health, progress has been made in the field of electro-
     convulsive therapy which is implemented in hospitals in line with medical standards and
     respecting patients' rights.


     15
            The labour law prohibits night work for children under eighteen (18) only for the industry sector; it does
            not provide protection for children working in agricultural enterprises employing less than fifty (50)
            employees; and it does not regulate the work of children in artistic and cultural activities and in the
            media. Lastly, the current legislative framework does not tackle the issue of children working on the
            streets.
     16
            Under the 2005 Law on child protection, child courts need to be established in every province.
            However, currently there are such courts in only 40 of the 81 provinces in the country.
     17
            On the basis of 2005 data, the average duration of trials in child courts is 326 days, compared with 234
            days in ordinary courts.



EN                                                        22                                                             EN
      However, people with disabilities are not receiving adequate public services. This is mainly
     due to lack of awareness of the available services and problems in accessing the services,
     especially physical barriers. The lack of data and research on persons with a disability and on
     conditions of care for mentally ill persons is preventing informed policy-making. Community-
     based services are not sufficiently developed as an alternative to institutionalisation, and
     resources continue to be limited in relation to needs. There is an ongoing problem of
     insufficient general medical care and treatment in mental health hospitals and rehabilitation
     centres.

     On labour rights and trade unions, the pending legislation amending the Trade Unions and
     Collective Bargaining, Strike and Lockout Laws has not moved forward substantially. Turkey
     needs to ensure that trade union rights are fully respected in line with EU standards18 and the
     relevant International Labour Organisation (ILO) conventions, in particular the rights to
     organise, to strike and to bargain collectively. This is a priority of the Accession Partnership.
     There are reports about restrictions on the exercise of existing trade union rights and
     dismissals due to trade union membership. Social dialogue mechanisms, including at tripartite
     level, are weak (See also Chapter 19 – Social policy and employment).

     The principle of anti-discrimination is enshrined in the Constitution and upheld in several
     laws. Homosexual relationships between consenting adults in private are permitted in Turkey.
     In recent years, associations of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community
     registered for legal status in Turkey and prosecutors refused to press charges following a
     request by the Ministry of Interior to close them. This has enabled them to start advocating
     and defending the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.

     However, the law does not duly mention all the grounds of discrimination, such as sexual
     orientation, and provisions of the Turkish Criminal Code on "public exhibitionism" and
     "offences against public morality" are sometimes used to discriminate against LGBT. In May
     2008, upon an appeal by the Istanbul Governorate, an Istanbul court decided to close down
     Lambda Istanbul, as its statute was considered against general morality. An appeal has been
     lodged before the Council of State in this case.

     Homosexuals have the right to exemption from military service. If they request such
     exemption, their sexual orientation is verified by means of degrading medical and
     psychological tests or by demanding proof of homosexuality.

     Transsexuals are occasionally subjected to physical assaults, including by the police.
     Homophobia has also resulted in cases of physical and sexual violence. These allegations
     require prompt and effective investigation.

     With respect to property rights, the Law on foundations was adopted in February 200819.
     This Law was first voted by Parliament in November 2006, but was subsequently vetoed by
     the then President Sezer. The Law addresses a large number of issues faced by religious
     communities, mainly over management and acquisition of property. In particular, under the



     18
            Turkey maintains its reservations on article 5 (right to organise) and article 6 (right to bargain
            collectively) of the revised European Social Charter.
     19
            In March 2008, the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) filed an application with the
            Constitutional Court requesting annulment of Articles 5(3), 6(3), 11, 12(1), (2) and (3), 14, 25, 26, 41
            and 68 of the Law. The Law entered into force on 28 February 2008.



EN                                                       23                                                            EN
      Law, community foundations can own property and manage it without prior permission20.
     Foundations can establish companies and commercial bodies and can participate in existing
     companies with a view to achieving their objectives and generating income. Non-Muslim
     community foundations can register in the Land Registry, under their names, immovable
     property which is either entered in their 1936 declarations, under figurative or fictitious names
     or was purchased by or bequeathed or donated to community foundations after their 1936
     declarations but registered under the name of the testator or of the donator or of the Treasury
     or of the Directorate-General for Foundations because of restrictions on owning property.
     Donations of immovable property to foundations cannot be seized or mortgaged. Properties
     which are no longer used, wholly or in part, for their original purpose, can be transferred to
     another foundation of the same community, leased or have their use changed. The
     Directorate-General for Foundations issued a Circular in May 2008 that deals with the process
     of restitution of properties of non-Muslim foundations registered under figurative or fictitious
     names, or in the name of the Treasury or the Directorate General for Foundations. An
     implementing regulation was published in the Official Gazette in September 2008.

     However, the Law addresses neither the issue of properties seized and sold to third parties nor
     that of properties of foundations that were fused before the adoption of the new legislation. In
     addition, implementation will be crucial to attaining its objectives.

     On 8 July 2008, the ECtHR decided21 on the claim of the Ecumenical Patriarchate that had
     been deprived of its property acquired in 1902 and dedicated to a specific use in 1903 via the
     Foundation of the Büyükada Greek Orphanage for Boys. The applicant alleged, in particular,
     that by ordering registration of its real estate in the name of the orphanage, under the
     management of the State Directorate-General for Foundations22, the domestic courts had
     breached its right to peaceful enjoyment of its property. The Court held that the Turkish
     authorities were not entitled to deprive the owner of its property without providing for
     appropriate compensation, and that there had been a violation of the ECHR.

     Problems encountered by Greek nationals in inheriting and registering property continue to be
     reported, in particular as regards, inter alia, the application by the Turkish authorities of the
     amended Land Registry Law. With respect to that issue, the ECtHR held23 that there had been
     a violation of Article 1 of Protocol 1 (peaceful enjoyment of possessions) to the ECHR and
     ordered either the return of the property or the financial compensation of the applicants.

     Syriacs continue to face difficulties in relation to property. Complaints about the seizure of
     their properties have increased, in particular in the context of the establishment of the
     cadastre. This concerns both private individuals and religious institutions.

     Overall, adoption of the Law on foundations has been a welcome step forward. However,
     implementation of the Law will be crucial. The outstanding issues also need to be addressed.
     Finally, the quality of the dialogue between the authorities and the communities concerned
     will be instrumental in creating an environment conducive to achieving progress.


     20
            A court decision should be issued when foundations sell immovable property or rights acquired on their
            establishment, whereas only a decision by the competent body of the foundation is needed to sell
            immovable property or rights acquired at a later stage.
     21
            Fener Rum Patrikligi (Ecumenical Patriarchate) v. Turkey case (application 14340/05)
     22
            The Directorate-General for Foundations considered the orphanage a "defunct" foundation in 1995 and
            took over its management.
     23
            Apostolidis & Others vs. Turkey (Application No. 45628/99).



EN                                                       24                                                          EN
      Minority rights, cultural rights and protection of minorities

     Turkey's approach to minority rights, which refers to the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne24 remains
     unchanged. Without prejudice to the Treaty, the Turkish authorities consider Turkish citizens
     as individuals with equal rights before the law, rather than as individuals belonging to the
     majority or to a minority. This should not prevent Turkey, in accordance with European
     standards, from granting specific rights to certain Turkish citizens on the grounds of their
     ethnic origin, religion or language, so that they can preserve their identity. Full respect for and
     protection of language, culture and freedom of association, assembly, expression and religion
     and effective participation in public life for all citizens irrespective of their background or
     origin, in accordance with the principles laid down in the Framework Convention for the
     Protection of National Minorities and in line with best practice in Member States, have yet to
     be fully achieved.

     Turkey is a party to the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).
     However, its reservation regarding the rights of minorities and its reservation concerning the
     UN Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) regarding the right to
     education are causes for concern25. Turkey has not signed the Council of Europe Framework
     Convention for the Protection of National Minorities or the European Charter for Regional or
     Minority Languages.

     The repeated requests of the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities (HCNM) to
     follow up on his last visit to Turkey of December 2006 were not accommodated. There is a
     need to start a dialogue between Turkey and the HCNM on issues such as the participation of
     minorities in public life and broadcasting in minority languages. This would facilitate
     Turkey's further alignment with international standards and best practice in EU Member
     States.

     Management of minority schools, including the dual presidency, remains an issue, pending an
     implementing regulation. Work is under way to remove discriminatory language from
     textbooks.

     The Greek minority continues to encounter problems with education and property rights. In
     June, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) adopted a Resolution26
     on the Greek minority on the islands of Gökçeada (Imvros) and Bozcaada (Tenedos). The
     resolution calls for preserving the bicultural character of the two Turkish islands as a model
     for cooperation between Turkey and Greece. Furthermore, it takes account of positive
     gestures made by the Turkish authorities, mainly in connection with the Greek community's
     architectural heritage, and calls on Turkey to maintain up the momentum by taking additional
     measures, in particular on property and education issues.




     24
            According to the Turkish authorities, under the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne minorities in Turkey consist
            exclusively of non-Muslim religious communities. In practice, the minorities which the authorities
            associate with the Treaty are Jews, Armenians and Greeks.
     25
            Extract from the reservation to the ICCPR: "The Republic of Turkey reserves the right to interpret and
            apply the provisions of Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in
            accordance with the related provisions and rules of the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey and the
            Treaty of Lausanne of 24 July 1923 and its Appendixes."
     26
            Resolution 1625 (2008).



EN                                                       25                                                          EN
      Overall, Turkey has made no progress on ensuring cultural diversity and promoting respect
     for and protection of minorities in accordance with European standards.

     As regards cultural rights, following the June 2008 amendments to the relevant Law, TRT -
     the public service broadcaster - is allowed to broadcast nationally all day long in languages
     other than Turkish. Since 2004 this has only been possible for half a day. An appeal against
     the Law is pending before the Constitutional Court. Furthermore, a new local radio channel,
     Muş FM, has received authorisation to broadcast in Kurdish.

     However, the launching of a channel broadcasting in languages other than Turkish has been
     delayed on several occasions. Furthermore, two of the four local TV and radio channels that
     started broadcasting in languages and dialects traditionally used by Turkish citizens closed
     down during the reporting period. Time restrictions laid down in the law on the Radio and
     Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) continue to apply, with the exception of films and
     music programmes. Educational programmes teaching the Kurdish language are not allowed.
     All broadcasts, except songs, must be subtitled or translated into Turkish. These restrictions
     make broadcasting in languages other than Turkish cumbersome and non-viable
     commercially. The police and the Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) apply a
     policy of strict monitoring of broadcasts in Kurdish. Several court cases and investigations
     against GÜN TV - the only TV channel currently broadcasting in Kurdish - are ongoing, in
     relation to the wording of Kurdish songs the channel has aired.

     Children whose mother tongue is not Turkish cannot learn it in the Turkish public schooling
     system. Under the current legislation such education can be provided only by private
     educational institutions. However, in the case of Kurdish, courses which had opened
     following the changes to the law have now closed down. As a result, there are currently no
     opportunities to learn Kurdish in either the public or private schooling system.

     No measures have been taken to facilitate access to public services for non-speakers of
     Turkish, although interpretation is usually available in courts. The case against the
     municipality of Sur (Central Diyarbakir) in June 2007, in which the Council of State
     dismissed the mayor from office and dissolved the Municipal Council for providing
     multilingual municipal services, is now before the ECtHR. A vice-governor will continue to
     serve as mayor of Sur until new elections, scheduled in March 2009, although by law by-
     elections should have been held within 60 days of the dismissal.

     According to the Law on political parties, the use of languages other than Turkish remains
     illegal in political life. In this context, a large number of investigations and court cases have
     been launched against officials and executives of the Democratic Society Party (DTP).

     As regards Roma, no steps have been taken to amend the Law on the Movement and
     Residence of Aliens, which authorises "the Ministry of Internal Affairs to expel stateless and
     non-Turkish citizen gypsies and aliens that are not bound to the Turkish culture", thus
     promoting discrimination against Roma. This provision needs to be repealed. Turkey has yet
     to establish a strategy to address the problems of Roma. Turkey is not participating in the
     2005-2015 Decade of Roma Inclusion.

     Roma, who comprise other similar but distinct ethnic groups such as Dom, Lom and
     Travellers, face social exclusion and marginalisation in access to education, discrimination in
     health services, exclusion from employment opportunities, difficulties in accessing personal
     documentation and exclusion from participation in public affairs and public life.



EN                                                  26                                                   EN
      As regards housing, the Roma population has faced several instances of demolition of
     communities, forced evictions and exposure to poor living and sanitary conditions without
     recourse to any publicly accountable process. In many cases, Roma who have been
     dispossessed as a result of demolition join the ranks of IDPs, with all the social problems that
     this entails. As regards demolition of the Roma neighbourhood in Istanbul’s Sulukule district
     and the relocation of its members, which started in spring 2008, the Prime Ministry's Human
     Rights Commission has called for an inquiry into any possible infringement of human rights.
     In addition, civil society organisations have filed a suit for cancellation of the urban
     regeneration project in Sulukule.

     Overall, Turkey made some limited progress on cultural rights, but restrictions continue,
     particularly on the use of languages other than Turkish in broadcasting, in political life and
     when accessing public services. There are no opportunities to learn these languages in the
     public or private schooling systems. There has been no progress in the situation of the Roma,
     who frequently face discriminatory treatment in access to adequate housing, education, social
     protection, health and employment. Demolitions of Roma neighbourhoods, in some cases
     involving forced evictions, continue.

     Situation in the East and South-East

     In May 2008 the Government announced the guidelines and general content of a plan for
     development of the South-East. The Government pledged to allocate total funding equivalent
     to €14 billion to complete the ongoing South-East Anatolia Project (GAP) between 2008 and
     2012, thus increasing the originally planned spending on the project by €10.2 billion. The four
     pillars of the action plan are: economic development, social development, infrastructure
     development and institutional strengthening. Most investments will concentrate on the energy
     and agriculture sectors.

     Terrorist attacks by the PKK, which is on the EU list of terrorist organisations, continued in
     the South-East, but also throughout the country and claimed many lives. Following
     parliament's authorisation the government ordered air strikes against terrorist hideouts in
     Northern Iraq. The "temporary security zones" established in June 2007 in the provinces of
     Sirnak, Siirt and Hakkari close to the Iraqi border remain operational.

     The Newroz spring celebrations were marked by tensions in the provinces of Van and Hakkari
     (see section on freedom of assembly). No incidents were reported in other provinces, such as
     Diyarbakir and Istanbul, where demonstrations were allowed.

     Landmines remain a security concern for both military personnel and civilians. The
     government reported ongoing use of anti-personnel mines by the PKK/KONGRAGEL.
     During the reporting period there have been 66 casualties among civilians and security forces
     due to anti-personnel landmine explosions. Under the Convention on the Prohibition of the
     Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction
     (the 'Ottawa Convention'), of which it is a signatory party, Turkey has undertaken to destroy
     all antipersonnel mines in mined areas as soon as possible, but no later than 1 March 2014.

     Refugees and internally displaced persons

     The process of compensation of losses due to terrorism and the fight against terrorism
     continued to make progress. By May 2008, 313 829 cases had been filed under the relevant
     Law. Some 40% of these, i.e.126 945 cases have been finalised, out of which 82 893 obtained



EN                                                 27                                                   EN
      a favourable response. The deadline for applications for compensation expired on 31 May
     2008.

     However, despite the efforts made by the Government to improve the situation, reports on
     shortcomings in implementation of the Law, in particular as regards uneven and inequitable
     calculation of compensation between provinces, have continued. Furthermore, due to lack of
     resources and the heavy workload of the Damage Assessment Commissions, progress in the
     assessment and payment of compensation has been slow.

     The situation of IDPs in urban areas remains a cause for concern. IDPs suffer from economic
     and social marginalisation and have little or no access to social, educational and health
     services. Return of IDPs is prevented by a number of factors. These include mainly the
     security situation, but also the lack of basic infrastructure, lack of capital, limited employment
     opportunities and the threat posed by the village guard system.

     There is no overall national strategy to address the situation of IDPs. The insufficient
     institutional capacity of departments responsible for IDPs remains a challenge. There is a
     need to involve civil society further in the development of IDP policies.

     No steps have been taken to abolish the system of village guards.

     Arbitrary cases of refoulement, although not numerous, remain a high concern. There are
     reports that one of them ended in life loss. (For the situation of asylum seekers and refuges
     see chapter 24, Justice, Freedom and Security).

     Overall, as regards the East and South-East, the government's decision to complete the South-
     East Anatolia Project is a step in the direction of addressing the economic and social
     difficulties of the region. Further efforts are needed in order to create the conditions for the
     predominantly Kurdish population to enjoy full rights and freedoms. Compensation of
     internally displaced persons (IDPs) has continued. However, the government lacks an overall
     national strategy to address the IDP issue. The village guard system still has to be phased out.

     2.3.     Regional issues and international obligations

     Cyprus

     The Turkish government has continued to express its commitment to a comprehensive
     settlement of the Cyprus problem under the auspices of the United Nations. It welcomed the
     start full-fledged negotiations in September between the leaders of the two Cypriot
     communities under the Good Offices Mission of the UN Secretary General. Turkey needs to
     take concrete steps to contribute to a favourable climate for a comprehensive settlement.

     Since the Council's decision of December 2006, Turkey has made no progress towards fully
     implementing the Additional Protocol.

     Turkey has made no progress on normalising bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus.
     Turkey continues to veto Cyprus's membership of several international organisations and of
     the Wassenaar Agreement on the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports and on Dual-Use Goods.

     Peaceful settlement of border disputes




EN                                                  28                                                    EN
      Turkey and Greece have continued their efforts to improve bilateral relations. The 40th round
     of exploratory talks was held in July 2008 in Athens. Exploratory talks have been continuing
     since 2002.

     In November 2007, the Turkish and Greek Prime Ministers met at the border to inaugurate a
     natural gas pipeline. In January 2008, the Greek Prime Minister paid an official visit to
     Turkey - the first of this kind in 49 years. Both Prime Ministers expressed their commitment
     to improving bilateral relations.

     So far 31 agreements have been signed and 24 confidence-building measures have been
     agreed since 2000. The third joint exercise between military disaster response units was
     conducted in May in Athens. Contacts at military level continue. The Greek Chief of General
     Staff paid an official visit to Turkey in May 2008.

     The threat of "casus belli" in relation to the possible extension of Greek territorial waters in
     the resolution adopted by the Turkish Grand National Assembly in 1995 still remains. The
     Council highlighted in December 2007 that “Turkey needs to unequivocally commit to good
     neighbourly relations and to the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the UN
     Charter, including, if necessary, jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. In this
     context, any threat or action which could negatively affect good neighbourly relations and the
     peaceful settlement of disputes should be avoided”.

     During the reporting period, Greece formally complained to Turkey about continued airspace
     violations.

     As a full member of the Barcelona process, Turkey participated in the launch of the Barcelona
     Process: Union for the Mediterranean in July 2008.

     Bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and other neighbouring Member
     States have been developing positively. Turkey continues to play a positive role in the
     Western Balkans. Relations with Bulgaria remained positive.

     As regards the International Criminal Court (ICC), see Chapter 31 – Common Foreign and
     Security Policy.


     3.      ECONOMIC CRITERIA

     In examining the economic developments in Turkey, the Commission's approach was guided
     by the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, which stated that
     membership of the Union requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the
     capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. The period
     the Commission took into consideration run up to end of September.

     3.1.    The existence of a functioning market economy

     Economic policy essentials

     Turkey broadly implemented the economic policy agreed with the Commission and with
     international financial institutions and successfully completed the stand-by arrangement with
     the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in May 2008. The pre-accession economic
     programme submitted to the Commission in December 2007 adequately reflected the needs



EN                                                 29                                                   EN
      for, and commitments to, further reform. At times, the domestic political crisis hampered the
     decision-making process with regard to reforms. The fragmentation of responsibilities
     between government bodies has been partly addressed in the new government's programme
     by assigning the role of coordinating economic policy to a Deputy Prime Minister. However,
     coordination of budgeting and medium-term economic policy-making has so far only partially
     benefited. Decisions sometimes appear to be taken on an ad hoc basis and impact assessments
     are either lacking or based on partial information. In conclusion, consensus on economic
     policy essentials has been maintained and coordination has improved.

     Macroeconomic stability

     In 2007, GDP growth slowed down to 4.6% from 6.9% one year earlier, mainly due to
     contraction in agriculture and weaker aggregate demand. There was a slowdown or stagnation
     in many sectors of the economy from construction to textiles, while agriculture was severely
     hit by a drought. Private consumption growth remained weak in 2007 growing by 3.8%, in
     spite of a strong surge (up 6.3%) in the third quarter. The public sector purchased significantly
     lower volumes of goods and services and markedly reduced construction after sizeable
     spending increases in these areas in the run-up to the July 2007 elections. The contribution of
     the external sector to growth fell substantially, as imports grew by 14.4% and 15.7% year-on-
     year in the third and fourth quarters respectively, while export growth was 2.5% in the fourth
     quarter, down from 12.5% in the first quarter of 2007. The slowdown in domestic demand
     was triggered mainly by a tighter monetary stance, higher interest rates and lower lending.

     In the first half of 2008, the economy slowed down, due to the global financial turbulence and
     the domestic political uncertainty, and GDP grew by 4.2%. GDP growth slowed down to
     1.9% in the second quarter of 2008 from 6.7% in the first. Agriculture contracted by 3.5% in
     the second quarter after output had increased by 2.6% in the first quarter. Final consumption
     of households lost steam in the second quarter, as expenditure rose by 2.8% after a 7.6%
     increase in the first. In March 2008, the GDP methodology was aligned with the European
     System of Accounting (ESA95). Consequently, one third was added to the size of the
     economy, which resulted in a 2006 GDP of more than TRY 750bn (about EUR 380bn).
     Although economic growth has slowed down, due to a combination of weaker aggregate
     demand and higher uncertainty linked to the global financial crisis and domestic political
     developments, overall economic performance demonstrated that the foundations and
     resilience of the Turkish economy are substantially stronger today than some years ago.

     The thorough revision of Turkey's national accounts in March 2008 reduced the current
     account deficit relative to GDP by one third to more benign levels. The sharp rise in oil prices
     has been putting pressure on Turkey's current account. This has become more pronounced in
     recent months as oil prices have soared to record levels. The current account deficit in the first
     half of 2008 totalled about 6.3% of GDP, compared with 5.7% in 2007 and 6.2% in 2006. The
     same indicator, excluding energy, was below 2.8% throughout the period. This pointed to a
     trade deficit of about 7% in the first half of 2008. As in previous years, over one third of the
     gap is covered by services, mainly tourism, which performed better in 2007 and 2008 than in
     2006. On the capital account, capital inflows have more than funded the current account
     deficit, leading to an increase in official reserves. Recently almost 40% of the current account
     deficit has been financed by foreign direct investment (FDI) and the remainder by long-term
     inflows, comprising long-term external borrowing by the private corporate sector and banks.
     The share of portfolio investments declined significantly and became negative from March
     2008 on. FDI inflows totalled 3% of GDP in 2007 and 2% in the first half of 2008. The
     services sector (mainly banks and telecommunications) accounted for almost two thirds of


EN                                                  30                                                    EN
      total FDI. Turkey's external debt rose by almost 20% in nominal terms to roughly 45% of
     GDP by mid-2008. Private external debt makes up two thirds of the total and is rising fast,
     which is a source of potential risk. International reserves increased by over 15% to EUR 47
     billion, or about six months of imports. Although higher oil and commodities prices put
     pressure on Turkey's current account, long-term capital inflows remained high, leading to an
     increase in official reserves. Turkey's external position remained solid throughout 2007 and
     the first half of 2008.

     So far (by mid-October 2008), the global financial crisis has caused a correction in Turkish
     asset prices and in the currency, which could also lead to further output losses and inflationary
     pressures. The impact on the Turkish banking system has remained limited so far, largely due
     to previous restructuring measures and comfortable prudential indicators. However,
     considerable external financing needs stemming from large external deficits in combination
     with the private sector's significant reliance on external financing and a sizeable - albeit
     falling - debt stock make Turkey potentially vulnerable to changes in investor sentiment. The
     quality of financing of the current account deficit has deteriorated, gradually moving away
     from equity investment towards debt accumulation. The close cooperation amongst Turkish
     financial authorities as well as with the international and European financial institutions, the
     existence of strong prudent regulations, the implementation of restrictive monetary and fiscal
     policies as well as the continuation of structural reforms are providing a stabilising effect to
     financial markets and the economy.

     Labour market conditions remained challenging. The working-age population increased by
     over 700,000 in 2007. Fewer than 300,000 of them joined the workforce; the rest remained
     outside the labour market. Consequently, the employment rate hovered around 43% in 2007-
     2008. In particular, the female employment rate remained low at less than 24% of the total
     working-age population. The unemployment rate remains between 10% and 11%.
     Unemployment was much higher among the young (about 20%). Long-term unemployed
     accounted for more than half of job-seekers. Agriculture typically employs many unpaid
     family workers. This leads to a statistically lower rate of unemployment, but suggests large
     pockets of underemployment in this sector and the economy at large. Job creation continued
     to be hampered, in part, by labour market rigidities (for example, high severance payments
     and the sizeable social security wedge), by the skills mismatch between labour demand and
     supply and by the cost of hiring and firing. Overall, labour continues to act as a brake on
     employment.

     Annual inflation rose to 8.4% by the end of 2007 and to 10.6% by mid-2008, well above the
     inflation target, partly due to soaring food and energy prices. Excluding unprocessed food and
     energy, underlying inflation rose to 10.4% in mid-2008, a four-year high, depreciated
     substantially vis-à-vis the euro in September and October 2008. The Central Bank maintained
     the formal inflation targeting policy adopted in January 2006, but chose to raise its inflation
     targets in June 2008 in an effort to anchor inflationary expectations more firmly. At the same
     time, the Central Bank decided to raise rates by a cumulative 150 base points, after having cut
     them by 225 base points in the course of 2007 and early 2008. It has also announced a
     tightening bias with the aim of fighting second-round effects on prices. This action was seen
     as a reaffirmation of the independence of the Central Bank and a strong signal of its continued
     commitment to fighting inflation. Credit to the private sector remained broadly constant on
     around 30% of GDP and is therefore not seen as a significant threat to price stability. In
     conclusion, price stability has weakened significantly over the last year, partly due to external
     factors.



EN                                                  31                                                   EN
      Fiscal performance has been satisfactory, although the government missed its 2007 fiscal
     targets. Public debt (ESA95 definition) fell from 46.1% of GDP in 2006 to 38.8% in 2007 and
     is expected to continue to fall over the medium term, improving fiscal sustainability. The
     2007 primary surplus – which excludes interest payments – equalled 3.5% of GDP (ESA95
     methodology), down from 5.5% in 2006. In June 2008, the authorities announced the
     introduction of a five-year (2008-2012) medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF), which offers
     good visibility over the government's medium-term fiscal strategy. The MTFF seeks to reduce
     public debt from around 39% in 2007 to 30% in 2012. This is to be achieved by means of a
     primary surplus of 3.5% in 2008 (unchanged compared with 2007), declining to 2.4% in
     2012. The overall deficit is projected to remain below 1.7% over the five-year period. The
     fiscal space gained from reducing debt service is to be used to finance three major policy
     initiatives: an employment package and social security reform, the South Anatolian project
     (mainly infrastructure investment) and decentralisation to municipalities. Fiscal targets for the
     first half of 2008 have been met, in large part due to the higher – mainly tax – revenue which
     kept pace with inflation.

     The recent depreciation of the Turkish currency caused a limited decrease in government debt
     in the first few months of 2008. Recent interest-rate increases had much less impact on the
     debt stock, which increasingly comprises fixed-rate government securities. However,
     domestic financial markets remain relatively shallow and the debt service dynamics are still
     closely related to movements on global financial markets. The average maturity of
     government debt securities therefore fell in the first quarter of 2008 to 23.5 months, from 25.7
     months in 2007. By mid- 2008, almost 60% of total government securities were in the hands
     of banks, up by almost 2% from 2007, and thus mitigating the decline in non-residents' share.
     Completion of the IMF stand-by agreement, combined with the perceived uncertainty
     regarding the future direction of economic policy and the protracted global financial crisis,
     call for stronger anchoring of the fiscal position. In addition to the MTFF, introduction of a
     robust and binding fiscal rule would substantially reduce uncertainty and the vulnerability of
     Turkey's public finances to further turbulence on the financial markets. Overall, fiscal
     sustainability has been further strengthened thanks to a prudent fiscal policy, but the fiscal
     position remains vulnerable to shocks and requires stronger anchors in the face of heightened
     uncertainty and the ongoing financial crisis.

     In 2007, several coordination and control bodies were set up within the Ministry of Finance.
     Accountability, efficiency and transparency of the budgeting process have benefited
     substantially. This is illustrated, for example, by the development of the MTFF. As last year,
     some key elements are still lacking, in particular unifying all tax administration functions
     under the Revenue Administration, strengthening audit capacity and making increased use of
     standard risk-based audit techniques, which would all enhance transparency and provide
     significant support for anti-corruption efforts. Overall, measures to increase fiscal
     transparency have continued.

     Over the last few years, Turkey has successfully implemented a strong stabilisation
     programme. Now it is entering a new stage in its development strategy aimed at raising the
     growth potential by means of higher public investment, job creation, structural reforms and
     better education. This entails a difficult balancing act between the desire for higher growth
     and the need to maintain price stability and reduce the current account deficit. While the
     public debt level is no longer a major concern for fiscal sustainability and the current policy
     mix is broadly adequate, macroeconomic stability remains vulnerable to shocks, given the
     wide external imbalances. Interplay of market forces



EN                                                  32                                                   EN
      The independence of regulatory and surveillance agencies has been largely preserved,
     although some imperfections persist. However, for the first time in several years significant
     progress was made, in particular in the area of price liberalisation. Electricity and gas prices
     were raised in January and June 2008 respectively to reflect the actual costs better. Since July
     2008, electricity prices are subject to automatic indexation. Price subsidies are being phased
     out with a view to privatising some public electricity companies by the end of 2008.
     Administrated prices make up less than 10% of the total weight of the consumer price index
     (CPI) basket.

     Despite its stated intention to allow State-owned firms to set their own prices, the government
     continued to set prices of goods produced by them. The prices of some key commodities
     produced by the State are periodically raised. In general, the government sets annual prices
     for a range of crops. The municipalities continue to place ceilings on the retail price of bread
     and the Ministry of Health controls medicine prices. Permission for price increases has
     traditionally depended more on political than on economic criteria. Public institutions and
     local authorities have large arrears with the State-owned energy company. Price liberalisation
     is fairly advanced and further progress has been made recently. However, the government
     continues to control the prices of some key commodities.

     Although privatisation continued, with a number of major operations, the private sector's
     share of GDP remained virtually constant at almost 89% in mid-2008. The pace of
     privatisation slowed down only slightly from the peak years of 2005-2006. Between July
     2007 and mid-2008, privatisation proceeds totalled about EUR 5 billion. Major privatisations
     included the sales of the petrochemicals company Petkim (EUR 1.4 billion), the State
     railways port facility in Izmir (EUR 0.8 billion) and of the State tobacco company TEKEL
     (EUR 1.2 billion) and the initial public offering of 15% of the shares in Türk Telekom (EUR
     1.3 billion). In conclusion, privatisation has advanced significantly.

     Market entry and exit

     Turkey has made efforts to improve the business climate and reduce impediments to market
     entry and exit. Appreciation for this has been voiced by international experts. The business
     registration process was further streamlined in 2007. Legal changes were enacted to make it
     easier to obtain business and operating licences, including in the mining sector. About 55,000
     new companies were established in 2007, an increase of 5% compared with 2006. During the
     same period, roughly 10,000 firms were liquidated. Sectoral restrictions on foreign ownership
     continued in the areas of maritime transport, civil aviation, groundhandling, road transport,
     radio and TV broadcasting, energy, accountancy and education. Entry to the banking and
     capital markets remained restricted to mergers and acquisitions as no new licences have been
     issued. Overall, some progress can be reported in business entry and exit.

     Legal system

     A reasonably well functioning legal system, including in the area of property rights, has been
     in place for several years. However, no major progress has been made over the last year.
     Registering a property takes six procedures and six days in Turkey. Enforcing commercial
     contracts remains a lengthy process, which needs 36 procedures and takes 420 days on
     average. The specialisation of commercial court judges appears insufficient, leading to
     lengthy court proceedings. The expert witness system continues to function as a parallel
     judiciary system, without improving the overall quality. Use of out-of-court dispute-




EN                                                 33                                                   EN
      settlement mechanisms remains low. The legal environment continues to pose practical
     challenges and creates an obstacle to a better business environment.

     Financial sector development

     The financial sector grew steadily in 2007 and 2008 and attracted sizeable foreign
     investments. The total assets of the financial sector grew by 18% in 2007 and at a similar pace
     in early 2008. Almost 90% of these assets belong to banks. The ratio between the banking
     sector's balance sheet and GDP increased to almost 68% at the end of 2007 compared with
     66% a year earlier. The ratio of deposits and loans to GDP increased by 3% and 15%
     respectively in 2007, which demonstrates the continuing financial deepening and increasing
     intermediation, channelling more savings into productive investment. The efficiency of
     financial intermediation improved slightly, as the interest rate spread narrowed by about 0.2%
     in the previous year. The banking sector attracted strong interest from foreign investors.
     Consequently, foreign shareholders' share of the sector's assets grew to 26% by the first
     quarter of 2008 from 22% in early 2007. Including shares listed at the stock exchange, almost
     45% of the Turkish banking sector is owned by foreigners.

     The Central Bank made significant efforts to monitor developments in the financial sector
     more closely. Liquidity requirements were tightened and a new survey was launched to
     monitor better both private-sector debt and the exposure of the corporate sector to exchange
     rate volatility. The delay in adoption of the new Turkish Commercial Code is hampering the
     Central Bank's risk assessment capacity, since financial statements have not been aligned with
     international financial reporting standards. More broadly, adoption of the new Commercial
     Code is a priority, as it would significantly improve the business environment. Banking
     profitability ratios improved markedly, by about one third in the year to December 2007.
     Capital adequacy ratios decreased significantly, albeit from very high levels, from 21.8% in
     2006 to 17.3% by March 2008. Concentration in the banking sector is at the same level as last
     year, as the five largest credit institutions' share of the banking system remained at 60% at the
     end of 2007. In April 2008, the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency (BRSA)
     increased the liquidity requirements for banks in order to mitigate the increased risk stemming
     from the corporate sector's growing foreign exchange borrowing. The net liabilities of the
     non-bank corporate sector in foreign denominations increased by 60% in the year to
     December 2007 to about EUR 45 billion (12% of GDP). The share of foreign exchange-
     denominated corporate loans as a percentage of the banking sector's total loans fell from
     almost two thirds at the end of 2006 to just 56% in early 2008. In spite of several bouts of
     instability during 2007-2008 the financial sector has shown remarkable resilience.

     3.2.     The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the
              Union

     Existence of a functioning market economy

     Macroeconomic stability has been broadly preserved during the reporting period. Financial
     market turbulence and domestic political developments added some uncertainty to the
     business environment, but at the same time underlined the economy's improved shock
     resilience so far. The authorities have improved the investment climate by reducing
     administrative barriers to firms' entry and operation, by reducing and simplifying the tax
     system while improving the effectiveness of the tax administration and corporate governance
     and by privatising State-owned enterprises.




EN                                                  34                                                   EN
      Human and physical capital

     In 2007-2008, the authorities continued to implement the educational reform programme,
     which is part of the National Development Plan (2007-2013). This programme has two key
     pillars for education: modernisation and reform. On the one hand, it aims to increase the
     responsiveness of education to demand and, on the other, to enhance the educational system.
     The challenges are significant. The top students in Turkey perform well. However, the gap
     with the vast majority of Turkish students remains significant. Participation in higher
     education remains low by international standards. Around 40% of 20- to 24-year-olds had
     completed secondary education, but about ten percent of school-age children are still not
     enrolled in primary schools. Reforms and increased spending on education are having some
     positive impact on educational attainment. In 2007, enrolment rates improved at all levels of
     education, in particular for female students, but significant problems persist.

     Little progress has been made on correcting the mismatch between supply and demand forces
     on labour markets, which largely stem from the sectoral shift away from agriculture combined
     with often inadequate education. Coverage of the population eligible for unemployment
     benefit is limited by rigid eligibility conditions. In May 2008 the government adopted a new
     employment package, which provides incentives to employ young workers, women and
     people with disabilities. The package aims to reduce non-financial burdens and social security
     contributions, which had acted as a disincentive to formal employment. In particular, the
     package reduces employment costs for five years for newly employed people in the above-
     mentioned categories. However, it does not affect other barriers which complicate job
     creation, for example the very high severance payments. The Turkish Employment Agency
     continued its efforts to improve its institutional capacity and the services provided to job-
     seekers. Turkey declared 2008 the year for combating undeclared work. Overall, the situation
     on the labour market remains challenging, but a set of broadly adequate reforms have been
     tabled.

     Both domestic and foreign investments remain robust. Private gross fixed capital formation
     grew by around 5% in 2007 and in the first half of 2008. Private capital formation totalled
     around 17% of nominal GDP. FDI inflows decreased to 3% of GDP in 2007 and 2% of GDP
     in the first half of 2008. Around 80% of these FDI inflows were equity investment and around
     20% real estate purchases. As a result, the FDI stock stood at EUR 53.7 billion (about 15% of
     GDP), of which about one quarter was due to 2007 inflows. Most of the equity investments in
     2007 were in financial services (60%) and manufacturing (20%). Investment growth
     weakened, albeit from very high levels.

     For many years infrastructure investment has been hampered by the need to consolidate
     public finances and the failure to cut lower-priority spending. Inadequate infrastructure is
     increasingly affecting economic activity. Therefore, the government adopted a spending
     programme, which aims at releasing about TRY 17 billion (EUR 8.7 billion) for investment in
     infrastructure in the South-eastern Anatolia region between 2008 and 2012. In addition, extra
     power-generating capacity is planned in order to keep pace with the rapidly growing
     electricity consumption (7% on average in each of the past five years). The new government's
     initiatives aim at boosting investment in infrastructure. Also, the EBRD shareholders have
     recently decided that the Bank should start operating in Turkey, a decision that was supported
     by the Commission and the EU shareholders. The EBRD's support will contribute to Turkey's
     further development and reform programme. The EBRD can support the development of a
     more open and entrepreneurial economy by promoting growth of small businesses, supporting




EN                                                35                                                  EN
      the Turkish government's privatisation programme, bringing private sector financing and
     know-how to the provision of public services.

     Sectoral and enterprise structure

     The share of agriculture in employment fell by about 1 percentage point to 26.5% in 2007.
     Most jobs were created in the services sector. The share of services in the total labour force
     rose to 48%. Employment in industry and construction accounted for roughly 20% and 6%
     respectively. The relative size of agriculture in GDP fell from 8.3% in 2006 to 7.7% in 2007.
     Industry's (including construction) contribution to GDP remained stable at roughly 31%,
     while services generate about 60% of national income. The sectoral shift away from
     agriculture towards services has continued.

     SMEs account for 99% of all enterprises in Turkey and 77% of total employment. However,
     SME ratios for capital investment (38% of the total), value added (26.5%), exports (10%) and
     bank credit (5%) point to low labour productivity, insufficient access to finance and barriers
     to entering foreign markets. Informality is widespread throughout all corporate sectors, but
     particularly amongst SMEs. Small enterprises continue to suffer from insufficient managerial
     capacity and a too small knowledge base to cope with the increasing competition on the
     markets. To sum up, SMEs continue to have insufficient access to finance and know-how and
     too often operate in the grey economy.

     Restructuring was supported by privatisation in some areas, such as telecommunications.
     Progress has been made on restructuring and preparing for privatisation in the energy sector,
     where the main outstanding problems are related to cross-subsidies and large distribution
     losses. In the private sector, strong productivity gains indicate that the restructuring process
     has been largely successful. Overall, the process of structural transformation of the economy
     has advanced relatively well, mainly in the form of privatisation.

     State influence on competitiveness

     Transparency in the corporate sector has improved and accounting standards have been
     upgraded, although the new Commercial Code has not yet been adopted. The absence of
     transparent monitoring of State aid and of supporting policies to reduce distortion has an
     adverse effect on competition and competitiveness in the economy. Public procurement
     policies continue to be undermined by exceptions to the regulatory framework. In addition, a
     number of derogations have been introduced by sectoral laws, which has further limited the
     scope of the law. Overall, State intervention continues to influence competition and
     competitiveness considerably, although the State's role as an active player on the markets is
     being further reduced.

     Economic integration with the EU

     Turkey's trade openness has increased marginally. Exports and imports of goods and services
     totalled 60% of GDP in 2007. The share of exports to the EU increased slightly from 56.0% in
     2006 to 56.4% in 2007. Imports from the EU as a share of total imports declined, from 42.6%
     to 40.4%, mainly due to the rising import bill for energy, which Turkey imported almost
     exclusively from non-EU countries. Investors from EU Member States continued to invest
     heavily in Turkey, though at a slower pace. About two thirds of all FDI inflows recorded in
     2007 originated from EU Member States, down from 82% in 2006. In the first quarter of
     2008, the share of FDI flows from the EU fell further to 53%. In 2007, GDP per capita in



EN                                                 36                                                   EN
      Turkey stood at 43.3% of the EU-27 average. The EU remains Turkey's largest trading and
     investment partner.


     4.       ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP

     This section examines Turkey’s ability to assume the obligations of membership – that is, the
     acquis as expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation, and the policies of the Union. It
     also analyses Turkey’s administrative capacity to implement the acquis. The analysis is
     structured in accordance with the list of 33 acquis chapters. In each sector, Commission's
     assessment covers progress achieved during the reporting period, and summarises the
     country's overall level of preparations.

     4.1.     Chapter 1: Free movement of goods

     Some progress can be reported with alignment on the general principles applicable to free
     movement of goods. The communiqué on standardisation in foreign trade, applicable in 2008,
     further reduced the list of items subject to conformity assessment upon import to 100 from
     about 150 in 2007. For the first time, all 20 communiqués regarding standardisation in foreign
     trade were published together at the beginning of 2008. This provided a consolidated
     overview of the standardisation and licensing requirements for imports into Turkey, which
     was helpful to traders as import checks and licensing are carried out by five different public
     authorities. Mandatory standards on gas appliances, pressure equipment, batteries and
     chemicals used in batteries were abolished. In principle, products in free circulation in the EU
     and bearing the “e”, “E” or “CE” marking are exempted from conformity assessment
     procedures.

     However, technical barriers to trade still exist, in particular in the area of old approach
     directives such as on legal metrology, pharmaceuticals, chemicals and foodstuffs. There are
     limitations to the free circulation of goods in the non-harmonised areas, as Turkey has not
     introduced the mutual recognition principle. Licences are still necessary for goods considered
     old, renovated or faulty and second-hand motor vehicles.

     As regards horizontal measures, further progress can be reported on standardisation.
     Adoption of European standards by the Turkish Standards Institute (TSE) gained pace. So far
     the TSE has adopted a total of 11 048 standards of the European Committee for
     Standardisation (CEN), 3 725 standards of the European Committee for Electro-technical
     Standardisation (CENELEC) and 336 standards of the European Telecommunication
     Standards Institute (ETSI). The overall rate of harmonisation with EN standards rose to 97.4%
     from more than 90% last year. The restructuring of the TSE continued and it has been
     reinforced with a separate standards preparation centre, 89 operational committees and a clear
     separation of its various tasks. However, a revised law reflecting the new structure of the
     TSE, in accordance with the requirements for full membership of the CEN and CENELEC,
     has yet to be adopted.

     As regards conformity assessment, further progress was made in the area of notified bodies.
     There are six Turkish notified bodies, operating in the areas of lifts, appliances burning
     gaseous fuels, construction products (cement), pressure vessels and recreational craft.

     Further progress can be reported regarding accreditation. Following the signature of four
     European Accreditation Cooperation (EA) multilateral agreements (MLA) last year, the



EN                                                  37                                                   EN
      outcome of EA assessment of the Turkish Accreditation Agency (TURKAK) in the fields of
     certification of products and persons has been positive. TURKAK is already a member of the
     International Accreditation Forum (IAF) and has a mutual recognition agreement with
     International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC). The number of TURKAK
     accreditations rose to 246, an increase of 13% since last year. TURKAK has become the
     monitoring authority for good laboratory practice, following signature of a protocol between
     the designating ministries and TURKAK. The revised law aiming at further harmonising
     TURKAK’s structure with the European accreditation system has not yet been adopted.

     Limited progress has been made in the area of metrology. An amending regulation on the type
     approval of measures and measuring instruments was adopted and published in the Turkish
     Official Gazette on 6 November 2007. Measuring instruments remain a problematic area, with
     excessive requirements on service stations that need to be established prior to import. Turkey
     is now able to affix its own TR sign for initial verification of measuring instruments in
     accordance with the relevant EU directive.

     Limited progress on market surveillance can be reported. Some public authorities, including
     the telecommunications authority, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Industry and
     Trade, published revised regulations on the method and principles of their market surveillance
     systems. In the cases of the telecommunications authority and the Ministry of Health, the
     amendments are of minor importance and further clarify earlier texts. The new regulation
     from the Ministry of Industry and Trade replaced the 2003 text and contains specifications on
     the qualifications and training of inspectors. It also provides for a single inspection report
     template and includes sections on the principles of market surveillance, measures to be
     imposed, powers and obligations and coordination. The Under-secretariat of Foreign Trade
     increased the administrative fines for violation of the Framework Law regarding technical
     legislation on products, which lays the foundation for market surveillance, by 7% in 2008.
     The fines have almost tripled since the law was published in 2002. However, there are no
     reliable data on the sanctions and fines imposed by the ministries concerned. The skills of
     relevant personnel in the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Ministry of Health and the
     Ministry of Public Works and Settlement have been considerably enhanced. The Ministry of
     Industry and Trade and the Ministry of Health increased considerably their market
     surveillance activities in 2007 as compared with 2006. However, the operational budgets
     allocated for market surveillance remain too small. Generally, considering the size of the
     country, more extensive surveillance activities are required, taking into account visibility
     considerations and risk assessment principles. Continuous training remains to be
     institutionalised in order to maintain the benefits of the recently acquired knowledge. A
     common method for data gathering has still not been achieved. Coordination between
     surveillance agencies remains problematic, including automated exchanges of information.
     The consumer movement needs support if market surveillance is to become really effective.

     Alignment of horizontal measures is advanced. However, the effective implementation of
     market surveillance, the adoption of final legislative changes on standardisation and
     accreditation, and the alignment in the area of legal metrology have all been delayed.

     Alignment of product legislation adopted under the old approach is advanced. Further
     progress was made on motor vehicles by amending existing and introducing new legislation.
     The Ministry of Trade and Industry has published a transposing regulation regarding the type
     approval of agricultural or forestry tractors, their trailers and other interchangeable towed
     machinery. The Ministry of Health published amending legislation on the pricing of
     pharmaceuticals and on the pre-packaging and labelling of pharmaceuticals for human use.


EN                                                38                                                  EN
      The latter launched a pharmaceuticals tracking system to fight against counterfeit products.
     The problem regarding regulatory data protection and the authorisation system for generics
     for which a marketing authorisation was applied for before 1 January 2005 has still not been
     solved. The double import licensing obligation for alcoholic beverages has ended, after the
     import permission procedure of the Tobacco and Alcoholic Beverages Regulatory Authority
     was converted into a notification requirement. The control certificate and obligatory sampling
     requirement by the Ministry of Agriculture is still a cause for concern.

     Limited progress has been made on the new and global approach product legislation, as
     alignment in this area was already advanced. Full alignment on four more directives was
     verified during the reporting period, following the 20 directives verified last year. The
     Ministry of Industry and Trade transposed the revised electromagnetic compatibility directive.
     The new regulations will enter into force in December 2009. The Ministry of Industry and
     Trade also transposed the directive on efficiency requirements for new hot-water boilers fired
     with liquid or gaseous fuels. Harmonised standards on recreational craft were published in
     October 2007. Amendments were made to the legislation on toys and childcare articles
     containing certain phthalates and intended to be placed in the mouth by children. The new
     provisions transpose Directive 2005/84/EC.

     Regarding procedural measures, no progress can be reported. No provisions to align with
     Regulation 339/93 have been adopted. However, the Under-secretariat of Foreign Trade is
     implementing the directives on radio and telecommunication terminal equipment, toys,
     personal protective equipment, construction products, batteries and medical devices, based on
     standardisation in foreign trade communiqués. Products that have to bear the CE marking and
     entering Turkey from third countries are subject to checks by the TSE upon import. There has
     been no progress on cultural goods and firearms.

     There has been no progress in the non-harmonised area. The mutual recognition principle, a
     key element for this chapter, has not yet been introduced into the Turkish trade regulations.

     “Free movement of goods” is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey
     adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and
     endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in
     place on the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or
     where the last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position fully to implement the
     acquis relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     Some progress can be reported in this chapter. Alignment of product legislation and
     horizontal measures, except on market surveillance and legal metrology, is advanced.
     Effective market surveillance activities are needed, taking into account visibility
     considerations and risk assessment principles, including coordination between surveillance
     agencies. Some key issues for this chapter, such as identifying and abolishing remaining
     import licences, restrictions on the import of used motor vehicles, introduction of the mutual
     recognition principle into Turkish legislation and transitional issues connected with
     application of regulatory data protection for pharmaceutical products are yet to be solved.




EN                                                 39                                                  EN
      4.2.     Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers

     With regard to access to the labour market, legislation on work permits for foreigners that
     eased procedures and exempted certain professionals from obtaining work permits, including
     people working on national and international projects, was vetoed and is still before
     Parliament.

     Efforts to strengthen the capacity of the Turkish Employment Agency (ISKUR) continued.
     These concerned, in particular, IT infrastructure and training to allow job-matching services
     in an electronic environment. Further efforts are needed to prepare for participation in the
     EURES (European employment services) network.

     With regard to co-ordination of social security systems, efforts to build the administrative
     capacity of the Social Security Institution continued. Appointment of medium- and high-level
     managers at central and provincial level also contributed to consolidation of the (Social
     Security) Institution. The efforts to build “one-stop-shop” social security centres in districts
     are continuing.

     There have been no developments as regards preparations for the introduction of the
     European Health Insurance Card.

     Conclusion

     Overall, limited progress has been made. Alignment is at an early stage. The administrative
     capacity needs to be strengthened further.

     4.3.     Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services

     Limited progress can be reported on right of establishment and freedom to provide services.

     As regards freedom of establishment, Turkey still has not provided a detailed alignment
     strategy on this chapter, as required under the Accession Partnership. Gender, nationality and
     residence requirements, but also disproportionate language and other requirements, such as
     the one-office rule for pharmacists, continue to be incompatible with the acquis.

     No new developments can be reported as regards freedom to provide cross-border services.
     Registration, licence or authorisation requirements continue to be incompatible with the
     acquis in this specific area. Firms already established in a Member State are still subject to
     specific registration and authorisation requirements. The same applies to service providers,
     who have to fulfil particular requirements in order to obtain the necessary work and residence
     permits.

     Work to identify obstacles to exercising the right of establishment and freedom to provide
     services has not yet started. No steps have been taken to establish the structure needed for that
     purpose. Alignment in the fields of establishment and services is at an early stage.

     No progress can be reported in the field of postal services. The legal monopoly (reserved
     area) regardless of weight limits is still intact. No independent regulatory authority exists in
     the sense of the acquis. The accounting system still lacks transparency for want of an
     appropriate accounting method for reserved and non-reserved services and of separation of
     accounts.




EN                                                  40                                                   EN
      Some progress can be reported in the area of mutual recognition of professional
     qualifications. A regulation on harmonisation of the minimum training requirements for
     regulated professions (medicine, nursery, midwifery, dentistry, veterinary medicine,
     pharmacy and architecture) has been adopted and published in the Official Gazette, with the
     aim of aligning with Directive 2005/36. The Vocational Qualifications Authority (VQA) has
     taken further steps towards becoming operational, including recruitment of staff and adoption
     of several regulations on staff and working methods. This should allow the authority shortly
     to develop standards on the professions which will fall under its remit. However, the principle
     of reciprocal recognition is still applied to a number of regulated professions whereas
     automatic recognition is the general rule under the acquis. Various requirements based on
     nationality and language criteria persist. Discrimination based on gender also persists in the
     area of midwifery. Despite a cross-reference to the midwife profession in the recently adopted
     Law on nurses, male students are still not entitled to attend midwife schools. No procedure
     has been set up to allow distinctive recognition of professional and academic qualifications,
     whereas the current administrative structures allow recognition of foreign qualifications at
     academic level only. Turkey still needs to designate a contact point as part of implementation
     of Directive 2005/36 on the recognition of professional qualifications.

     “Right of establishment and freedom to provide services” is one of the eight chapters covered
     by the conclusions on Turkey adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External
     Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December
     2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on the free movement of goods carried by
     vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or where the last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will
     not be in a position to fully implement the acquis relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     Alignment in the area of services and establishment is still at an early stage. The legal
     groundwork in the field of postal services still needs to be launched. Alignment with
     Community law on the mutual recognition of professional qualifications is progressing slowly
     but at a steady pace.

     4.4.     Chapter 4: Free movement of capital

     Some progress has been made on capital movements and payments. An out-of–court
     dispute settlement mechanism for customer complaints (the “Arbitration Panel for Customer
     Complaints”) has been established under the sectoral association. This collegiate body now
     needs to demonstrate independent decision-making. Some progress can be reported on
     transactions in the area of securities, instruments other than securities and foreign currencies.
     The Capital Markets Board abolished the maximum limit on investments by pension funds in
     foreign securities. The Board also removed the minimum requirement for private pension
     funds to invest in Turkish government debt instruments by amending the Regulation on the
     principles regarding the establishment and activities of pension funds. The Council of
     Ministers amended the Decree on protection of the value of Turkish lira and abolished several
     restrictions. Following this amendment, residents in Turkey are now entitled to buy and sell
     foreign currency from and to institutions which are authorised to do so in other countries. The
     amendment also entitles Turkish residents to purchase capital market instruments other than
     securities (e.g. derivatives) from abroad. Export revenue no longer has to be converted into
     Turkish lira. The corresponding decree entitles the Ministry in charge of the Treasury to
     entrust other institutions with execution of foreign currency transactions in Turkey and with
     extension of foreign currency denominated loans abroad. However, residual exchange



EN                                                  41                                                   EN
      controls remain on certain significant outward capital movements (i.e. foreign consumer and
     real estate credits to Turkish residents) which are considered by Turkey to have possible
     macroeconomic implications.

     The Turkish legislation in the field of real estate acquisition by foreigners is not fully
     consistent with Article 56 of the Treaty establishing the European Community. Acquisition of
     real estate by foreign physical and legal persons (established in other countries) has been
     regulated by the Land Registry Law. Foreign capital companies (established in Turkey) were
     subject to different arrangements for real estate acquisition which was regulated by the
     Foreign Direct Investment Law. In January 2008 the Constitutional Court overruled some
     provisions of the Land Registry Law on real estate acquisition by foreign physical and legal
     persons. In April 2006 the same court cancelled some provisions of the Foreign Direct
     Investment Law on real estate acquisition by foreign capital companies. To fill the legal gap,
     in July 2008 the Turkish Grand National Assembly enacted a Law amending the Land
     Registry Law. The new law takes into account the views expressed by the court in both the
     above-mentioned decisions and regulates the arrangements on real estate acquisition by
     foreign physical and legal persons and foreign capital companies. Under the new law, foreign
     physical persons can acquire real estate for residence or business up to certain area limits,
     while foreign capital companies established according the Foreign Direct Investment Law
     may acquire real estate in Turkey to conduct business in accordance with the activities listed
     in their articles of association. Foreign capital companies are legally considered as Turkish
     companies, regardless of the citizenship of their shareholders. Authorities also issued an
     implementing regulation requiring foreign capital companies to get the approval of the
     military chief of staff and the provincial governor when purchasing immovable property.

     Restrictions on foreign direct investment originating from the EU persist in a large number of
     sectors, such as maritime transport, civil aviation, ground handling, road transport, radio and
     TV broadcasting, energy, accountancy and education. A number of the restrictions depend on
     participation by Turkey in the relevant EU sectoral policies (in particular, in the area of
     transport). Little tangible progress has been made with free movement of capital in these
     various sectors to date.

     Turkey needs further to align its payment systems legislation with the acquis, as outlined
     under the Accession Partnership.

     Some progress has been made in the fight against money laundering. A number of
     implementing regulations have come into force, which supplement the Law on the prevention
     of laundering proceeds of crime. Those implementing regulations relate to reporting
     suspicious transactions with regard to financing of terrorism, customer due diligence,
     extension of obliged parties to lawyers and accountants, simplified customer identification
     measures in the necessary cases and the working principles and procedures of the
     Coordination Board for Combating Financial Crime. Turkey made a number of legislative
     amendments in order to prohibit those criminalised as a result of laundering of proceeds of
     crime and financing of terrorism from becoming founders, partners or managers in exchange
     offices, investment funds, capital markets brokerage houses, precious metals brokerage
     houses and real estate investment partnerships.

     Turkey signed Memoranda of Understanding with five countries on information exchange
     (Indonesia, Sweden, Portugal, Mongolia and Afghanistan). A special unit has been established
     in the Financial Crimes Investigation Board (MASAK) to fight financing of terrorism. A
     general communiqué regarding the reporting of suspicious transactions and terrorist financing



EN                                                 42                                                  EN
      has been adopted. A regulation on measures to prevent laundering of proceeds of crime and
     terrorist financing has also been adopted, including measures on customer due diligence. The
     number of reports of suspicious transactions to MASAK increased from 1 140 in 2006 to
     2 946 in 2007, mostly originating from the banking sector. Similarly, the number of reports of
     suspicious transactions with regard to financing terrorism increased from 8 in 2006 to 144 in
     2007. In 2007, 43 dossiers were referred by MASAK to the public prosecutors office for
     prosecution as compared with 39 in 2006. 22 of those resulted in the opening of cases before
     courts in 2007 as compared with 27 in 2006. However, convictions, confiscations, seizures
     and freezing of assets have remained quite rare up until now.

     The lack of effective enforcement capability and implementation mechanisms remains a cause
     of concern. MASAK provided training for bank staff, judges and prosecutors, finance and tax
     inspectors, obliged parties and other relevant enforcement bodies. However, MASAK’s
     resources are still insufficient and the skill levels of the judiciary and law enforcement bodies
     are not considered adequate. Turkey has not yet ratified the 2005 Council of Europe
     Convention on laundering, search, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds from crime and on
     the financing of terrorism. Deficiencies identified in the report on the third review by the
     Financial Action Task Force (FATF) will be discussed in the FATF plenary meeting in
     February 2009. They still need to be properly addressed.

     Overall, Turkey has made further progress as regards alignment with the acquis on the fight
     against money laundering and financing of terrorism.

     Conclusion

     There has been some, albeit uneven, progress on this chapter. The maximum limit on
     investments by private pension funds in foreign securities has been removed. Restrictions on
     the use of export proceeds and on foreign currency transactions have been abolished.
     Restrictions on free movement of capital persist in various sectors of the economy. The
     Parliament enacted an amending law regulating the acquisition of real estate by foreign
     physical and legal persons and by foreign capital companies. Turkey made further progress
     with alignment with the acquis on the fight against money laundering. New implementing
     regulations and communiqués have been adopted and the number of suspicious transactions
     reported has increased considerably. Turkey needs to continue alignment in this area.

     4.5.     Chapter 5: Public procurement

     There has been no progress on the general principles. The 15% price advantage for domestic
     bidders is still enshrined in the legislation. However, less use was made of it than during the
     previous year (1.5% of the overall contract value in 2007 compared with 8% in 2006). A
     number of additional derogations from the Public Procurement Law have been adopted,
     notably in the laws with regard to associations, on Istanbul as the 2010 capital of culture and
     on witness protection. The amendment of the electricity market law brought in another
     derogation to the public procurement law. Such derogations reduce competitiveness and
     efficiency in public tender.

     Little progress has been made on the award of public contracts. The fairly high participation
     rate in tendering procedures indicates that information on public tenders is widely available,
     including on the internet. However, the Turkish Public Procurement legislation remains
     different from the acquis in various respects. The legislative amendment in 2007 introduced
     the concept of framework agreements to be applied only in the health sector. Utilities continue



EN                                                  43                                                   EN
      to be subject to the classical public procurement procedures. There is no coherent legal
     framework for the award of concessions and public private partnerships. The 2008 thresholds
     and financial limits for procurement remain above EC levels.

     Both the Public Procurement Agency and the State Planning Organisation have significant
     administrative capacity. However, staff awareness of the State Planning Organisation as
     regards the acquis needs to be strengthened. The specialisation of functions and staff
     competencies in the Public Procurement Agency needs to be enhanced.

     As regards the institutional set up, Turkey has designated the Ministry of Finance as
     coordinator of public procurement policy, including concessions and PPPs, which is one
     priority of the Accession Partnership. This decision has had a positive impact, as it has
     allowed better coordination of legislative preparations in 2008.

     No progress can be reported on alignment with the Remedies Directives. The number of
     complaints lodged by dissatisfied tenderers has grown over the years, from about 900 in 2003
     to over 4 000 in 2007, though representing only 3% of all contract awards. The review
     procedure is lengthy and results in creation of backlog of cases.

     Conclusion

     Some limited progress can be reported in this chapter. Turkey has started to address its
     priorities in the area of public procurement and has the capacities to address them. The
     designation of the Ministry of Finance as overall policy coordinator on public procurement is
     a positive development. The Ministry will have to ensure consistent policy development in the
     area of public procurement and steer its implementation. This needs to be backed up by a
     comprehensive strategy on the reforms necessary in terms of legislative alignment and
     institutional capacity-building in order for Turkey to comply with the acquis. Derogations
     from the general provisions that have the effect of reducing competition and efficiency in
     public tenders need to be avoided.

     4.6.    Chapter 6: Company law

     No substantial progress can be reported on company law. The Turkish Commercial Code
     (TCC) and the law on the entry into force and implementation of the TCC were not adopted
     yet. Adoption of these two laws would mark an important step forward in this chapter,
     although some of the provisions of the TCC are not fully aligned with the acquis. Companies
     cannot register online in the registries operated by Chambers of Commerce. Establishment of
     an electronic database and on-line access to basic company information depend on adoption
     of the TCC. Adoption of the TCC will trigger amendment of various other laws, including the
     Capital Markets Law (CML) concerning domestic mergers and divisions of public limited
     liability companies, the exercise of certain rights of shareholders in publicly held companies
     and takeover bids.

     Little progress can be reported in the area of corporate accounting. The Turkish Accounting
     Standards Board (TASB) adopted and published several interpretations and revisions of a
     number of international accounting standards (IAS). The adopted standards apply solely to
     listed companies. The Capital Markets Board of Turkey (CMB) imposes an obligation on
     listed companies to publish their yearly and quarterly financial statements in compliance with
     the IAS and the international financial reporting standards (IFRS) in the format applicable in
     the EU. However, only a few companies in Turkey are listed. The majority are non-listed.



EN                                                44                                                  EN
      Further recruitment took place in order to enhance the administrative capacity of the TASB.
     Specific training was organised for newcomers. The process to enhance the professional skills
     of the TASB continued.

     No progress can be reported on auditing. The regulatory framework for the Auditing
     Standards Board is still under preparation.

     Conclusion

     No substantial progress can be reported in the period under consideration. Overall, alignment
     remains moderate. The new TCC, designed to improve alignment with the acquis and trigger
     the process of alignment of other laws in this area, has not been adopted.

     4.7.    Chapter 7: Intellectual property law

     The overall legislative framework for intellectual and industrial property rights is largely
     aligned with the acquis, but administrative capacity remains insufficient to ensure effective
     enforcement, as required by the Customs Union Decision. Turkey remains one of the
     countries where IPR protection and enforcement are most problematic. Effective enforcement
     is a priority under the Accession Partnership Agreement and for the negotiations on this
     chapter.

     Some progress has been made in the area of copyright and neighbouring rights. Turkey has
     considerably improved coordination and cooperation between various stakeholders in the area
     of copyright and related rights issues. A coordination committee was set up in 2007 within an
     EU-funded twinning project. It was convened in January 2008 to draft an action plan to
     strengthen copyright protection in Turkey. Another twinning project to strengthen
     enforcement capacity started in 2008 and will be conducted throughout the year with the
     Turkish national police as the main target group. Many training sessions and seminars have
     been organised to raise awareness of IPR enforcement issues. The number of collecting
     societies increased from 22 to 24. Four collecting societies in the music sector agreed on a
     common approach to setting tariffs, licensing and other issues. They also signed an agreement
     on the licensing of musical works used in hotels. However, conflicting views persist regarding
     collective rights management between users and rights-holders. Piracy of books and other
     media, such as CDs and DVDs, remains widespread. Turkey’s enforcement capacity is still
     lagging behind. The laws for ratification of the WIPO Copyright and Phonograms Treaties
     were published in the Official Gazette.

     Some progress can be reported concerning the legislative framework for industrial property
     rights. A revision of the regulation implementing the European Patent Agreement in Turkey
     has entered into force. The Turkish Patent Institute (TPI) has further improved its internal and
     external IT structure. Improvements can also be reported in online services (including an e-
     application system), search portals and public relations. Fifteen new staff members have been
     recruited. Several members of staff have attended training courses to improve their legal
     knowledge and various awareness-raising activities have been organised. However,
     inconsistencies persist between the trademarks department and the appeals board. Most of the
     appealed decisions are reversed by the appeals board and the courts. Measures should be
     taken to harmonise implementation on the basis of absolute and relative grounds, especially
     for earlier use, the level of similarity and the signs which may be used as trade marks,
     including three-dimensional trade marks. Appeal and opposition procedures are very lengthy.
     Infringements of well-known designs, trademarks and trade dresses are still a cause for



EN                                                 45                                                   EN
      concern. TPI practices and courts’ understanding of the same issues diverge. Proper reasons
     should be given for the decisions of the TPI. The regulatory framework, including a code of
     ethics for patent and trademark agents to prevent misconduct and take implementation
     forward, is not yet in place. So far no constructive dialogue has been established between the
     TPI and its customers and the various professional groups dealing with IPR.

     Particular attention should also be paid to bad faith and similar trademarks and industrial
     design issues.

     As regards enforcement, a high-level Intellectual and Industrial Property Coordination
     Board, co-chaired by the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the Ministry of Culture, has been
     established. The purpose of the Board is to foster cooperation between relevant institutions in
     order to improve the level of IPR protection. The Board will meet every six months. The
     Board will be able to invite other public institutions and private-sector representatives to its
     meetings. An action plan has been drawn up. The criminal provisions of the Turkish
     Copyright Law have been amended to harmonise them with the new Turkish Criminal Code
     and Turkish Criminal Procedure Code. The new provisions have reduced legal predictability
     and enforceability with regard to banderol application and the ex-officio powers of the police
     to seize pirate goods. Consequently, enforcement against piracy has almost come to a halt in
     most Turkish cities, with the exception of Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir. During the drafting of
     these special provisions, the opinions of the IPR enforcers (i.e. judges and prosecutors
     specialising in IPR and collecting societies) were not sufficiently taken on board. Therefore,
     stakeholders (including the judiciary) need to acquire a better understanding of the
     amendments to the criminal provisions in order to ensure effective enforcement.

     Following a recent Constitutional Court decision, Turkey’s trademark protection is at a crucial
     point. The court pointed out that trademarks infringements could not be punished under the
     current legislation because crimes and punishments are not defined appropriately in the
     relevant Turkish legislation. The court invited the government to remedy this situation and to
     address the current legal vacuum within six months, ending in January 2009. The relevant law
     prepared by the government has not been adopted. As long as the legal vacuum persists, all
     similar pending trademarks infringements will be affected. However, since other industrial
     property rights, like designs, patents, utility models and geographical indications, are also
     regulated in the same way as trademarks, the court’s decision will affect all infringements of
     industrial property rights. The Turkish authorities need to tackle this situation as a matter of
     urgency and to eliminate the risk that industrial property infringements cannot be punished.

     Nine new specialised IPR courts (three civil and four criminal in Istanbul, one civil in Ankara
     and one civil in Izmir) were recently established and brought into operation. The locations of
     the courts were selected on the basis of the level of commercial activities. The appeal stage of
     the IPR court procedure is very lengthy. Most of the files on criminal acts have been pending
     before the Supreme Court for a long time. Rights-owners are experiencing difficulties in
     obtaining preliminary injunctions or search and seizure warrants which would offer a proper
     enforcement solution to most cases. Training seminars and workshops have been held for
     stakeholders such as customs officers, national and municipal police forces, lawyers and the
     related staff of the enforcement bodies. Three public-awareness seminars were organised.
     Customs officers seized goods in 160 cases on their own initiative in 2007 compared with 45
     in 2006. Turkey remains one of the main sources of counterfeited and pirated products seized
     at EU borders.

     Conclusion



EN                                                 46                                                   EN
      Overall alignment with the acquis is relatively advanced. Coordination and cooperation
     between the IPR-related public bodies and their awareness have improved significantly.
     However, serious deficiencies remain in the area of industrial property rights, in particular
     with implementation and enforcement. Turkey is still considering its response to the European
     Commission's suggestion to establish a dialogue on Intellectual property Issues.

     4.8.    Chapter 8: Competition policy

     In the field of anti-trust, including mergers, there has been further progress on legislative
     alignment.

     The Competition Law was amended to provide further clarity and legal certainty in the
     provisions regulating fines imposed for competition infringements. The competition authority
     adopted a block exemption communiqué covering the insurance sector, in line with the
     acquis. The authority issued another block exemption communiqué on technology transfer
     agreements. There are a few divergences between this communiqué and the relevant
     Commission rules, in the form of hardcore restrictions due to the Turkish legislation on
     intellectual property rights. The authority published two guidelines on market definition and
     subcontracting agreements between non-competing undertakings. The rules on horizontal
     cooperation agreements, de minimis and sector-specific block exemptions for
     telecommunications and postal services still need to be transposed. The Banking Law exempts
     mergers and acquisitions leading to a market share below 20% in the banking sector from the
     competition authority’s control. This exemption limits enforcement of the merger control
     rules in the banking sector. The authority’s efforts to promote competition might be limited in
     the upcoming privatisation of public banks due to this exemption.

     The competition authority enjoys a sufficient level of administrative and operational
     independence. The authority’s emphasis on training for its staff is a determining factor for
     effective enforcement of the competition rules. All public authorities, including the Ministry
     of Industry and Trade to which the competition authority is linked administratively, need to
     respect the administrative and operational independence of the authority.

     As regards the enforcement record, in 2007, 238 merger and acquisition cases were handled
     and 232 cases were concluded (up from 199 and 186 in 2006). The authority opened 131
     cases on anti-competitive behaviour and finalised 148 cases (up from 108 in 2006). The Board
     opened 34 negative clearance and individual exemption cases and concluded 39 in 2007 (36
     and 33 in 2006). The fines imposed by the authority decreased by 50%, from TRY 27,002,139
     in 2006 to TRY 13,641,633 in 2007. The authority has also been active during the first half of
     2008. It took decisions on 65 cases of anti-competitive behaviour and on 109 merger
     notifications. The administrative capacity of the Council of State (high administrative court)
     for handling appealed competition cases still needs to be improved. However, the
     establishment of a special chamber in the Council of State in 2007 is expected to speed up the
     review of competition decisions.

     There has been no progress on alignment of the rules concerning public undertakings and
     undertakings having exclusive and special rights.

     In the field of state aid, no progress has been made. Turkey has not adopted the state aid
     legislation nor set up an operationally independent state aid monitoring authority.
     Furthermore, Turkey has not prepared the state aid inventory and has not reported on state




EN                                                 47                                                  EN
      schemes, as required by the transparency commitments. There are no rules ensuring
     transparency of financial relations between public authorities and public undertakings.

     Some progress has been achieved as regards state aid in the steel sector. Following the
     transmission of new information in 2008, the Commission has an improved understanding of
     the state aid granted from 2001 until now. Furthermore, Turkey has reviewed the national
     restructuring programme concerning both the state aid aspects and the market analysis and
     forecast for the Turkish steel industry. However, information is still needed on several
     capacity developments and some state aids of the last years as well as on a clear position of
     the Turkish authorities concerning future state aid to the steel sector.

     Conclusion

     In the field of anti-trust, including mergers, a high level of alignment has been achieved. The
     administrative capacity and operational independence of the competition authority are
     satisfactory. The authority enforces the competition rules effectively. There has been no
     alignment in the field of state aid. Turkey needs to implement the EU state aid discipline in
     the steel sector, in line with the long-standing commitment given in the ECSC Free Trade
     Agreement. Alignment in this chapter is not complete.

     4.9.    Chapter 9: Financial services

     Good, but uneven, progress can be reported on banks and financial conglomerates. With a
     view to strengthening the liquidity position in the banking system, the Banking Regulatory
     and Supervisory Agency (BRSA) introduced additional liquidity requirements. However,
     Turkey has postponed implementation of the BASEL II Accord. The Agency also advised
     private banks to build up a solid capital stock in response to the recent financial turmoil.
     Moreover, the prudential and supervisory standards have been tightened up. The BRSA
     imposed marked-to-market valuation for the derivative instruments recorded on bank balance
     sheets. The BRSA clarified the coordination rules for consolidated supervision of financial
     institutions which are being supervised by separate regulatory authorities. The Savings
     Deposits and Insurance Fund (SDIF) introduced five deposit premium categories for banks,
     based on their detailed risk profiles. In turn, the BRSA introduced additional reporting
     requirements for the representative offices of foreign banks. The Agency also placed an
     obligation on foreign banks’ branch and representative offices to apply for authorisation in the
     event of any change in the ownership of the parent undertaking in the home State. The BRSA
     organised several training sessions for its staff and gave a dozen staff members an opportunity
     to study abroad. The BRSA has also established further memoranda of understanding with
     third countries, taking the number of MoUs up to 16. Supervisory capacity has been enhanced
     by introducing new reporting requirements and an early warning system. In the area of
     banking and financial conglomerates, Turkey has further aligned with the acquis. Further
     efforts are needed to continue alignment with the new capital requirements for credit
     institutions and investment firms and with the other related directives (on deposit guarantee
     schemes, winding up and reorganisation, financial conglomerates and bank accounts), as
     outlined in the Accession Partnership.

     There has been significant progress in the area of insurance and supplementary pensions.
     The Treasury introduced the concept of “sponsoring undertaking” in a newly published
     regulation on occupational pension schemes. The same regulation also introduced limits on
     the fees and expenses that insurance companies are allowed to be charged, whereas the
     vesting period for group insurance policies was reduced to five years. The Treasury published



EN                                                 48                                                   EN
      a regulation on supplementary pension companies covering fit and proper criteria for
     ownership, licensing applications, mergers and acquisitions, rules on advertising and public
     disclosure. As far as solvency is concerned, the paid-in capital of an insurance company’s
     subsidiaries and affiliates has been included in the definition of the owners’ equity. As regards
     passenger transport, Turkey has increased the minimum level of coverage under the
     compulsory insurance scheme. However, coverage levels for personal injuries are still well
     below EU standards. The Treasury adopted a new communiqué requiring insurance and
     supplementary pension companies to publish their financial statements both in newspapers
     and on their own websites. Turkey has introduced a new type of insurance for loan
     repayments by bank customers. A new regulation on insurance mediation has entered into
     force. It has improved consumer protection and set new standards on registration and
     minimum capital, while introducing professional indemnity insurance for intermediaries.
     However, indemnity coverage levels are markedly below the EU standards. Several other
     insurance regulations have been published, covering training, internal control and risk
     management systems, and rules on establishment for brokers. However, provision of cross-
     border services is impeded, as the regulations place an obligation on foreign brokers to
     operate via branch offices established in Turkey. A regulation on the activities of committees
     of insurance experts has also been adopted. Finally, a regulation implementing the rules on
     the professional qualifications, accounting and bookkeeping responsibilities and activities of
     insurance experts has been published. Alignment in the area of insurance and supplementary
     pensions is partial. Establishing an independent regulatory and supervisory authority is a
     priority. Further alignment is needed, in particular on calculation of solvency margins,
     supervision of insurance groups and the minimum amounts of cover in motor insurance.

     Turkey already largely fulfils the acquis requirements. No further progress can be reported on
     financial market infrastructure.

     Some progress can be reported on securities markets and investment services. The Capital
     Markets Board of Turkey (CMB) imposes an obligation on listed companies to publish their
     yearly and quarterly financial statements in compliance with the international accounting
     standards (IAS) and the international financial reporting standards (IFRS) in the format
     applicable in the EU. The CMB successfully completed a twinning project which contributed
     to further improving the capital market legislation and the administrative capacity of the
     regulatory authority. Alignment in the area of securities markets and investment services is
     moderately advanced. Further progress is needed, in particular on markets in financial
     instruments, investor compensation schemes, prospectuses and market abuse.

     “Financial services” is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey
     adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and
     endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in
     place on the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or
     where the last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position fully to implement the
     acquis relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     There has been good progress in the area of financial services. Progress has been made on
     tightening up prudential and supervisory standards, both in banking and in the non-bank
     financial sector. Authorities have taken measures to strengthen the liquidity position and the
     capital adequacy of the banking system. A risk-based deposit insurance premium system has
     been introduced. As regards insurance and supplementary pensions, Turkey has made



EN                                                  49                                                   EN
      significant progress by adopting regulations on occupational pension schemes, publication of
     financial statements and insurance mediation. The CMB has introduced IAS and IFRS
     standards for listed companies. There was further alignment as regards banks and financial
     conglomerates, while alignment in securities markets and investment services is moderately
     advanced. Turkey largely meets the acquis requirements in the area of financial market
     infrastructure. Alignment in the area of insurance and supplementary pensions is incomplete;
     in particular, an independent supervisory authority in the insurance and supplementary
     pensions sector needs to be set up.

     4.10.   Chapter 10: Information society and media

     Some progress can be reported in the field of electronic communications and information
     technologies. As of June 2008, the total number of fixed subscribers is around 18 million with
     a penetration rate of roughly 25%. The total number of mobile subscribers reached to 63.6
     million with a penetration rate of 90%. The number of Internet subscribers reached to
     approximately 5.4 million, 5.3 million of which are broadband (ADSL) subscribers.

     Turkey continued its alignment by introducing new regulations on access and interconnection
     based on the 2002 EU framework, on operators with significant market power (SMP) on the
     reference interconnection offer (RIO) and the reference Unbundling Offer and wholesale
     broadband access conditions from the incumbent internet operator. Furthermore, mobile
     termination rates have continued to gradually decrease.

     There has been some progress on number portability, which may become possible from 10
     November 2008 in the mobile market after a central database became operational in the
     Telecommunications Authority. Some initial progress can also be reported for local loop
     unbundling following the revision on Turk Telekom’s reference unbundling offer last year. .

     However, the Electronic Communications Law which would provide the basis for alignment
     with the EU framework did not enter into force after its adoption by the Parliament. The
     Turkish President vetoed four articles on the administrative and financial conditions for the
     regulatory authority and the draft is back in Parliament for discussion. Competition in the
     fixed and broadband markets remains marginal. More than 95% of the broadband internet
     access services are provided by the incumbent’s internet operator. Limited progress can be
     reported towards equitable and transparent conditions for fixed wholesale broadband access.
     No progress can be reported with regard to accounting separation and cost accounting
     imposed on the fixed incumbent. High taxation on communication services unrelated to
     administrative costs for regulating the sector remains a problem. The scope and
     implementation of universal service obligations are still incompatible with the relevant
     acquis. Liberalisation of local telephony is still pending and undermines competition in the
     fixed and broadband markets. The regulatory body is well staffed and is self-financed.
     However, it lacks independence - notably in the authorisation process - and the decision
     making process of the Telecommunications Authority is not transparent.

     Implementing regulations on provision of internet services at public places and on principles
     and procedures concerning the regulation of the broadcasts on internet have been adopted
     during the reporting period. Implementation of these regulations have the potential to violate
     freedom of expression.

     In the area of audiovisual policy some progress can be reported, the Turkish Grand National
     Assembly amended the Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) Law allowing



EN                                                50                                                  EN
      broadcasts in languages other than Turkish (See Political criteria). RTÜK promoted self-
     regulation by broadcasters and enhanced its administrative capacity to fulfil its monitoring
     duties. Since August 2008, RTÜK decisions are accessible to the public.

     However, Turkey’s level of alignment with the EC acquis on audiovisual policy remains
     limited to provisions concerning advertising and the protection of minors. The Law on the
     establishment of radio and television broadcasts still poses problems in terms of non-
     discrimination on the grounds of nationality, definitions, jurisdiction, freedom of reception
     and retransmission, major events, promotion of European and independent works and
     restrictions on the share of foreign capital and television enterprises. As regards
     administration of the broadcasting sector, RTÜK has not reallocated frequencies or reviewed
     temporary licences. RTÜK established a regular dialogue with the broadcasters and enhanced
     the transparency of its decisions. However, further measures are needed in order to strengthen
     the functionality of the regulator.

     Conclusion

     Some progress can be reported in the field of electronic communications, in particular as
     regards competitive safeguard measures imposed on dominant operators, notably in the
     mobile and broadband markets. However, alignment with the EU framework remains limited.
     The adoption of a new primary electronic communications law well aligned with EU rules is
     crucial. As regards the acquis on audiovisual policy, Turkey’s level of alignment remains is
     limited.

     4.11.   Chapter 11: Agriculture

     Progress on legislative alignment with the common agricultural policy (CAP) has been
     limited. No progress can be reported concerning the announced restructuring of the Ministry
     of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA).

     As regards horizontal issues, Turkey has made limited progress. The government's
     announcement of the intention to scrap decoupled area payments and replace them by coupled
     payments remains a cause for concern. This would lead to Turkey’s agricultural policy
     drifting away from the reformed CAP and from the principles of competitiveness and market
     orientation.

     Turkey has advanced in preparing a strategy to develop the system of land identification and a
     farmer's register, as well as a strategy to develop agricultural statistics in line with EU
     requirements. Efforts to set up a pilot Farm Accountancy Data Network (FADN) have
     continued.

     Turkey continues to ban imports of beef and of live bovine animals originating in the EU.
     These barriers are not in line with bilateral obligations and their removal is a key component
     of the accession negotiations on this chapter.

     Concerning the common market organisations, some progress on acquis alignment could be
     noted with the adoption of two regulations on purchases and sales of cereals and rice and
     paddy rice. Progress has also been made on alignment of Turkey’s legislation with EU
     marketing standards for fruit and vegetables. The conformity checking operations, performed
     by the Turkish authorities prior to import into the Community for all fresh fruit and vegetables
     are recognised by the EU/Community.



EN                                                 51                                                   EN
      As regards rural development, substantial progress has been made. The Turkish rural
     development programme for 2007-2013, prepared under component V of the Instrument for
     Pre-Accession Assistance (IPARD) and designed to support policy development in the field
     of agriculture and rural development, as well as the preparation for the implementation and
     management of the Common Agricultural Policy, was approved by the Commission in
     February 2008. This marks a major step towards implementation of IPARD in Turkey.
     Concerning administrative structures, the head of the IPARD Agency has been appointed and
     a concise action plan for the accreditation process has been submitted to the Commission.
     According to the plan conferral of management powers by the Commission is scheduled for
     June 2009. The legislative framework for operation of the managing authority is in place and
     personnel, both at headquarters and at provincial level, are being appointed and trained.

     No progress was observed on quality policy and organic farming. As regards organic
     farming, Turkey has continued its efforts to be included in the equivalency list of third
     counties for imports of organic products according to Article 11 of Council Regulation (EEC)
     2092/91. Following the transmission of additional information regarding Turkish organic
     farming production rules and control system in the end of the year 2007, the Commission
     could close several points. The main areas of concern remain approval of inputs allowed in
     organic farming and supervision system

     “Agriculture” is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted by
     the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by
     the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on the
     free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or where the last
     port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position fully to implement the acquis relating
     to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     Alignment with the acquis remains limited. Turkey has made substantial progress on building
     the capacity necessary to implement IPARD. However, further efforts must be made to
     complete establishment of the necessary administrative and control structures so that they will
     be able to operate in a fully decentralised management system. Progress as regards
     administrative structures related to the CAP was limited to the FADN system and fruit and
     vegetables. Current support and strategic policy planning in Turkey seem to be developing
     away from the principles of the reformed CAP by strengthening support instruments linked to
     production. Technical barriers to trade in bovine products in breach of bilateral commitments
     remain. Overall, preparations are still at an early stage in this chapter.

     4.12.   Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy

     Transposition and implementation of EU food safety policy remain limited. The Framework
     Law on food, veterinary, feed, hygiene and official controls, which needs to provide for clear
     assignment of responsibilities, in particular for control bodies, has not yet been adopted.

     With regard to general food safety policy, the national rapid alert system for food and feed has
     been improved. Local units have been directly linked to the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
     Affairs to ensure effective follow-up of notifications. Monthly reports on the follow-up to
     RAFFS alerts are being sent to the Commission. However, the number of notifications
     received is still very high. Further efforts to follow up alerts and implement the necessary
     corrective measures are still needed.



EN                                                 52                                                   EN
      Regarding veterinary policy, Turkey has made limited progress on both transposition and
     implementation of the acquis.

     The first veterinary border inspection post (BIP) at Sabiha Gorken airport in Istanbul is not
     yet fully operational. The BIP receives a low number of consignments because most still
     arrive at Ataturk airport in Istanbul. Construction of three land and two seaport BIPs is under
     way. The system for identification and registration of bovines and their movements has been
     improved as regards registration of holdings (including animal markets), control of
     movements of animals and training of users of the database. Turkey has made further efforts
     to bring the system into line with the acquis. However, supplementary efforts are necessary as
     regards registration of movements in the bovine database. Initial work on identification and
     registration of ovine and caprine animals is ongoing, with the aim of setting up an
     identification system covering sheep and goats in line with EU requirements. For the time
     being, only some voluntary identification and registration activities have been introduced for
     small ruminants in some provinces. No progress can be reported as regards non-commercial
     movements of pets.

     Turkey has continued its efforts to combat animal diseases. Efforts have focused on avian
     influenza (AI) and foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), as in previous years. AI outbreaks were
     low in number in the reporting period and successfully contained with the cooperation of
     public health authorities. Intensive awareness-raising campaigns were implemented. The
     regulation concerning protection against AI has entered into force. Stricter measures on
     animal movements between Thrace and Anatolia have had a positive impact on the
     occurrence of FMD outbreaks in Thrace, where the number of outbreaks has considerably
     decreased. The last FMD outbreak in Thrace was in September 2007. Turkey has also started
     focusing on attaining brucellosis- and tuberculosis-free status in Thrace, although no
     significant progress has been observed on the ground. No progress can be reported with
     transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE). Turkey has continued its voluntary
     participation in the EU animal disease notification system (ADNS). Relevant information on
     animal diseases was provided to the EU and to other international organisations.

     Turkey has improved its procedures for implementing and following up the national residue
     monitoring plan and controls on veterinary medicinal products. However, additional progress
     is essential, mainly on the laboratory side and on inclusion of all substances on which controls
     are required by the EU legislation.

     Turkey’s current system for financing veterinary inspections and controls is not in line with
     EU practice. No progress has been observed regarding import requirements for live animals
     and animal products. The regime of individual licences for import of each consignment of live
     animals and animal products has not been modified. The de facto beef ban is still in place
     (See Chapter 11). Turkey has made no progress on animal welfare and zootechnical issues.

     No progress can be reported as regards placing on the market of food and feed.
     Transposition of the hygiene package, which is a key component of the accession negotiations
     on this chapter, has not yet been completed. Unclear division of tasks between different
     departments and institutions is still leading to problems with official controls. Some
     improvements were observed in the administrative structures as a result of intensive training
     programmes. Work has started on accreditation of inspection services, but no substantial
     progress has been observed in this field. The legislative basis has been put in place for
     establishment of the national food reference laboratory in Ankara. Risk-based annual control
     programmes have been established for several products. The data network system, which will



EN                                                 53                                                   EN
      allow more efficient implementation of inspection and control programmes, has been
     improved. Preliminary preparations for classification of agri-food establishments as regards
     their compliance with EU structural requirements, which is a key component of the accession
     negotiations on this chapter, have started. However, no action has been taken to bring agri-
     food establishments into compliance with the EU hygiene requirements. No progress has been
     observed on animal by-products.

     Alignment and implementation of the legislation on labelling, presentation and advertising,
     food additives and purity criteria, extraction solvents, quick frozen foodstuffs, food for
     particular nutritional uses and irradiated food has advanced.

     Transposition in the areas of flavourings, food supplements, novel food and genetically
     modified organisms (GMOs) has yet to be completed. Alignment and implementation of the
     legislation on food contact materials has advanced; however, further adaptations are required
     to bring the system fully into line with the EU system.

     Aflatoxin contamination remains a major problem. A communiqué on the methods of
     sampling, sample preparation and analysis for the official control of lead, cadmium, mercury,
     inorganic tin, 3-monochloropropane-1,2-diol and benzopyrene in foodstuffs and the
     communiqué on the maximum limits on contaminants have entered into force. Alignment is
     advanced in the case of mineral waters. No progress has been observed as regards specific
     rules for feed.

     Progress on phytosanitary policy remains limited. Transposition of the legislation on plant
     protection products is advanced. Implementing regulations on seeds and propagating material
     have entered into force. The law on plant health and quarantine has not yet been adopted. No
     developments were reported on international phytosanitary agreements.

     Conclusion

     Progress in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy has been limited and
     needs to be consolidated. Transposition and implementation of the acquis in this chapter
     requires considerable efforts. Strengthening administrative capacity at central and local levels
     is vital for proper implementation.

     4.13.   Chapter 13: Fisheries

     No significant progress has been made on alignment with the fisheries acquis. The revised
     law on fisheries has not yet been adopted. The central administration structures remain
     unsatisfactory. The spread of powers across different ministries and even different
     departments within the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) persisted.

     Some progress has been made as regards resource and fleet management. There has been
     improvement in the fisheries information system however it is not yet fully operational.
     Turkey’s satellite-based system for monitoring (VMS) the 86 blue-fin tuna fishing vessels is
     in place. This monitoring system is currently used by 196 vessels, . Two additional fishery
     port offices have been established and been brought into operation. No progress can be
     reported as regards stock assessment.

     Limited progress has been achieved on inspection and control. It is now compulsory to keep
     fishing records in logbooks for fishing vessels longer than 12 metres, which will allow



EN                                                 54                                                   EN
      registration and reporting of catches. Turkey has started work on introducing sales notes in 10
     wholesale markets on a pilot basis.

     No progress can be reported concerning structural action, market policy and state aid.

     As regards international agreements, Turkey signed a fisheries agreement with Yemen and a
     fisheries cooperation protocol with Georgia.

     “Fisheries” is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted by the
     Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed by the
     European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on the
     free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or where the last
     port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position fully to implement the acquis relating
     to this chapter.

     Conclusion

     Limited progress has been made on resource and fleet management and on inspection and
     control. However, Turkey has made no progress on legislative alignment in this chapter. The
     administrative structures necessary to implement the Common Fisheries Policy have not been
     established.

     4.14.   Chapter 14: Transport policy

     Preparations in the area of road transport are advanced and some further progress has been
     made. Licensing of road transport operators and certification of professional competence are
     close to completion. Turkey has issued a decree setting out the principles of a fleet renewal
     scheme and for phasing out old vehicles.

     Institutional capacity has been further strengthened. The Directorate-General for Highways
     has been transferred from the Ministry of Public Works and Settlement to the Ministry of
     Transport. This has improved coordination between transport authorities. Moreover the
     Directorate-General for Land Transport (DGLT) has established a new unit for
     implementation of the Regulation on dangerous goods. However, DGLT has not reached the
     necessary monitoring and control standards and a precondition for the Regulation
     implementation has not been fulfilled as Turkey has not yet become a party to the European
     agreement on the international carriage of dangerous goods by road (ADR). Financial and
     professional competence requirements are less stringent for domestic operators. Continued
     efforts are required in order to meet EU technical requirements, also in the field of road
     transport, in particular for the introduction of digital tachographs - where necessary
     preparatory work to meet international obligations and its implementation has not yet started -
     and for speed limitation devices' requirements for light buses and utility vehicles which are
     not in line with the acquis..

     There has been some progress in preparations for a new railways law, which are at an
     advanced stage, but there is no progress with its adoption process. Attention must be paid so
     that any new legislation achieves effective alignment with the acquis in the sector of rail
     transport.

     There is no inland waterways transport covered by the acquis in Turkey.




EN                                                 55                                                   EN
      Limited progress can be reported in the area of air transport. Processes related to SHD-T-35
     licences were aligned with the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) Regulations, Part
     66 and Part 147. Preparation of regulations on slot allocation, groundhandling services,
     passenger rights and maintenance systems is advancing. The EASA accredited the
     Directorate-General for Civil Aviation (DGCA) in the field of aircraft maintenance. However,
     its implementation capacity in these technical areas is lagging behind. Preparations for a
     single European sky are at an early stage.

     Air traffic management is suffering from a lack of regional cooperation. The lack of
     communications between air traffic control centres in Turkey and the Republic of Cyprus is
     seriously compromising air safety in the Nicosia flight information region.

     As regards maritime transport, alignment in the area of safety is well advanced. Secondary
     legislation on roll-on/roll-off passenger ships and high-speed craft has been published. The
     regulation on seafarers has been amended on the 7th of July 2008 in accordance with the
     provisions of the I/8 and Code A-I/8 section of the STCW-95 Convention. Preparations for
     improvement of the institutional capacity to prevent pollution from ships, along with
     emergency response capacity, have not yet been launched.

     The rules on cabotage and ship registration are not in line with the acquis. Turkey has not yet
     become a signatory to SOLAS-78, SOLAS-88 and Mar-Pol Annexes III and IV. Turkey is on
     the grey list of the Paris memorandum of understanding. The detention rate of Turkish vessels
     in 20078 improved to 6,12 %, compared with an EU average of 3,08 %.

     No particular development in the area of combined transport and satellite navigation can be
     reported.

     “Transport policy” is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted
     by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed
     by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on
     the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or where the
     last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position fully to implement the acquis
     relating to this chapter.

     No progress has been made on state aid. There is no established institution or legal
     framework in Turkey to regulate State aid.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made limited progress on transport. In the area of road transport, alignment is
     advanced. However, the implementation capacity is lagging behind and continued efforts are
     required to ensure due enforcement of road safety. Little progress can be reported in the rail
     sector. Progress in the maritime sector is uneven. The institutional capacity for prevention of
     pollution and emergency response is insufficient. There has been limited progress on air
     transport. The lack of communications between air traffic control centres in Turkey and the
     Republic of Cyprus is seriously compromising air safety. In both the air and maritime sectors,
     no progress has been made on becoming a party to international conventions.

     4.15.   Chapter 15: Energy

     Regarding security of supply, limited progress has been made. A legislative package with the
     aim of strengthening security of supply and speeding up investment in energy infrastructure


EN                                                 56                                                  EN
      was adopted. Under the new law, the State may, when necessary, engage in electricity
     generation in addition to the private sector. No developments were reported regarding
     approximation of the methods of calculating oil stocks with the EU method. The natural gas
     pipeline between Turkey and Greece is now in operation.

     Some progress can be reported on the internal energy market. The eligible consumers limit
     was lowered to 1.2 GWh which is equivalent to market opening of approximately 41%. A
     cost-based pricing mechanism came into force by July 2008. This mechanism enables State
     economic enterprises (SEEs) operating in the field of energy to reflect changes in their
     production/input costs in their sales prices. The mechanism is expected to contribute to better
     and sustainable pricing on energy markets and to help to improve the financial position of the
     SEEs concerned. However, cross-subsidies persist in the electricity sector and non-cost items
     like TRT share remain part of electricity bills. The privatisation process of four electricity
     distribution regions has been completed. The privatisation high council and Energy Market
     Regulatory Authority have not yet approved the processes. The percentage of their annual
     electricity generation that auto-producers are allowed to sell on the electricity market has been
     increased to 50% from 30%. By the end of 2007, 48.3% of electricity was generated by
     SEEs. Electricity theft and loss was reduced to 15%, but remains almost twice the EU
     average.

     There has been very limited progress as regards the natural gas market. By the end of May
     2008, the distribution tender process was completed for 55 regions. A total of 40 cities have
     started to use natural gas. The Ankara natural gas distribution company has been privatised.
     An amendment to the natural gas market law allows the state pipeline operator BOTAS to
     import LNG from spot markets. Also, the natural gas licensing regulation was amended in a
     way to facilitate LNG imports. No developments have been observed in transfer of BOTAS’s
     contracts to the private sector. BOTAS still imports 86.6% of the consumption in Turkey. The
     Natural Gas Market Law requires BOTAS to transfer purchase or sale contracts to the private
     sector until its aggregate annual imports fall to 20% of annual national consumption by 2009.

     Competition remains limited on both the electricity and the natural gas markets. To improve
     operation of the markets and establish competition, the regulatory authority needs to exercise
     its powers in a more assertive manner.

     No progress can be reported concerning state aid.

     In the case of energy efficiency, some progress can be reported. Following adoption of the
     Framework Law last year, an implementing regulation covering the transport sector has now
     been adopted. A prime ministerial circular has declared 2008 the year of energy efficiency
     and the government has drawn up an action plan on “energy efficiency movement”. The
     administrative capacity of the Directorate-General for Electrical Power Resources Survey and
     Development needs to be enhanced in order to make it more effective in this field. No
     national targets have been set for energy efficiency and renewable energy. The amendments
     to the Renewable Energy Law introduced additional incentives. The Energy Market
     Regulatory Authority issued the criteria to be applicable to renewable energy generation
     facilities for their connection to the grid. Following adoption of the Framework Law on
     geothermal energy, the implementing regulation on principles and procedures for exploration,
     operation and licensing of geothermal resources, natural mineral waters and geothermal-based
     gases was adopted.




EN                                                  57                                                   EN
      As regards nuclear energy and radiation protection, a Framework Law on establishment
     and operation of nuclear power plants and energy sales has been adopted. This marks a major
     change in Turkey’s energy policy. The Turkish Electricity Trade Company (TETAS)
     launched the tender for construction and operation of a nuclear power plant in Mersin Akkuyu
     and announced the call for proposals. For the tender of Turkey's first power plant only one bid
     was submitted and the evaluation process has started by end of September. The implementing
     regulation on competition and contracting principles and procedures within the scope of the
     Framework Law was also adopted. Turkey needs to fully implement the requirements of the
     Convention on nuclear safety, in particular those related to siting and to regulator's
     independence, and that the existing legislative framework in the field of nuclear safety and
     radiation protection is completed, implemented and monitored. Management of institutional
     radioactive waste needs to be brought into line with international recommendations, basic
     safety standards and best EU practice. Turkey has not acceded to the Joint Convention on the
     safety of spent fuel management and radioactive waste management.

     Conclusion

     There has been some, but uneven, progress in the area of energy. Several years after adoption
     of the Framework Laws on the electricity and natural gas markets, competition remains
     limited and transparent and cost-based pricing has yet to be achieved. National targets for
     energy efficiency and renewable energy have yet to be set.

     4.16.    Chapter 16: Taxation

     There has been little progress on indirect taxation. Turkey’s value-added tax legislation is
     partially aligned with the acquis. Further alignment of the structure, exemptions, special
     schemes and application of reduced rates is needed.

     As regards excise duties, the minimum levels on tobacco products have been increased.
     However, discrepancies between the Turkish legislation and the acquis on the structure of
     excise duty on tobacco and tobacco products remain unchanged. Turkey applies ad valorem
     rates and has no element of specific excise duties. The Tobacco Fund remains discriminatory.
     It sets a special duty on imported tobacco and cigarettes only, which is not applied to
     domestic products. Turkey has not introduced any duty-suspension arrangement for domestic
     movements and fiscal warehouses.

     Alcoholic beverages are taxed on the basis of an ad valorem duty, supplemented by a specific
     duty if the former is lower than the minimum amount. The specific duty levels are
     differentiated on the basis of the type of product, instead of alcohol content. The levels set are
     higher for imported products than for comparable domestic products. This discriminatory
     effect is not in line with the acquis, the Customs Union or WTO rules. The need to abolish
     discriminatory taxation practices is the key to further progress in the accession negotiations on
     this chapter.

     There has been some progress on direct taxation. Turkey amended the Personal Income Tax
     Law to comply with the revised Corporate Tax Law. This amendment and adoption of the
     implementing legislation for domains such as transfer pricing are positive developments for
     addressing harmful tax practices and for respecting the principles of the code of conduct for
     business taxation. Turkey will need to avoid introducing any measures contradicting the
     principles of the Code of Conduct for business taxation.




EN                                                  58                                                    EN
      Some progress can be reported in the field of administrative cooperation and mutual
     assistance. The semi-autonomous revenue administration and recently established
     Directorate-General for Revenue Policy continued improving their administrative capacity.
     The revenue administration published its second tri-annual strategic plan with performance
     indicators.

     Turkey has made some progress as regards operational capacity and computerisation. All
     provincial tax offices have been computerised. The large taxpayer unit is fully operational.
     Taxpayers file 99% of their tax returns electronically. Improvements in taxpayer services to
     encourage voluntary compliance are continuing, with the establishment of the taxpayer
     services unit, taxpayer call centre and taxpayer services centre. The revenue administration
     has developed an electronic tax database and risk-analysis system. The banderol tracking
     system on tobacco and alcoholic products is fully operational. Turkey’s tax revenue has
     increased, but measures for reducing the informal economy still need to be reinforced.

     Conclusion

     There has been little progress towards improving Turkey’s legislative alignment in this
     chapter. However, discriminatory taxation of alcoholic and tobacco products persists.
     Modernisation of the Tax Administration has continued, leading to improved service to the
     taxpayer and increase in revenue.

     4.17.   Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy

     There has been little progress in the area of monetary policy. The Capital Markets Board
     abolished the requirement whereby private pension funds must invest a minimum percentage
     of the premiums they collect in Turkish government debt instruments. In the area of monetary
     policy, Turkey is not yet sufficiently aligned with the acquis. The government and the Central
     Bank of Turkey set the inflation target jointly. The Central Bank sets limits for credit card
     interest rates. The Central Bank started the process for the re-introduction of the Turkish Lira
     (TRL) leading to the replacement of the New Turkish Lira as of 1st January 2009. The Central
     Bank’s statute has to be revised in order to ensure full independence of the Bank. The
     Banking Law allows for the disbursement of advance payments to the Savings Deposits
     Insurance Fund from the Central Bank. This provision is not in line with the prohibition of
     monetary financing of the public sector. As for the prohibition of privileged access by the
     public sector to financial markets, there are several provisions requiring the purchase of
     public securities.

     Some progress has been made in the area of economic policy. The government adopted an
     action plan for 2008 – 2012. The authorities completed some key legislative steps, in
     particular by adopting the social security law, the law on incentives for research and
     development, and an employment package to improve labour market conditions. Turkey
     submitted a Pre-Accession Economic Programme (PEP) to the Commission. The authorities
     published a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) for 2008 – 2012, which sets medium-
     term public debt and budget deficit targets after the expiry of IMF stand-by arrangement in
     May.

     Formulation and implementation of economic policy remained fragmented, despite efforts to
     improve co-ordination activities.

     Conclusion



EN                                                 59                                                   EN
      Some progress can be reported in the area of economic and monetary policy. Economic policy
     formulation and implementation remained fragmented. Little progress has been made in the
     field of monetary policy. Several shortcomings still exist, in particular regarding full
     independence of the central bank, the prohibition of monetary financing of the public sector
     and the prohibition of privileged access of the public sector to financial markets.

     4.18.    Chapter 18: Statistics

     Some progress has been made in statistical infrastructure. The Official Statistics
     Programme for 2007-2011 was updated. The programme defines standards, data compilation
     methodologies and publication schedules for all official statistics providers. The Turkish
     statistical institute (Turkstat) made some progress in strengthening its coordinating role.
     Cooperation with main data providers should be further improved. Main data providers should
     improve their administrative capacity, including language skills.

     Some progress has been made in classifications and registers. Turkish translations of major
     EU statistical classifications are available for use by all official statistics providers. Progress
     in setting up the business register and farm register systems remained very limited. There is
     an urgent need to further improve the administrative registers held by the Ministry of
     Agriculture. Further efforts are needed to finalise the establishment of a business register
     system.

     Significant progress has been made in sector statistics. In the area of demographic and social
     statistics, Turkey completed for the first time an address-based population registration system
     for the 2007 population census. In macro-economic statistics, which is a key area for the
     accession negotiations in this chapter, Turkey completed a major revision of its national
     accounts, which largely aligned them with the European System of Accounts, ESA 95. In
     agriculture statistics, another key element for the chapter on statistics, limited progress was
     made. Pilot surveys on vineyards, pesticide use and fruit were conducted. Preparations are
     underway to improve statistics on crop, livestock and meat production, as well as milk
     production and dairy statistics. Efforts need to be stepped up in both these areas. In social
     protection statistics, the survey on income and living conditions has been completed. As for
     labour statistics, progress has been made in structure of earnings and labour costs. In
     education statistics, the adult education survey has been completed. Progress can be noted on
     structural business statistics and short-term statistics. As regards tourism statistics, field
     studies for the household domestic tourism survey have been completed. As regards
     environmental statistics, progress has been made in statistics on municipal water, wastewater,
     and environmental expenditure.

     Conclusion

     There has been good progress in the area of statistics. The administrative capacity improved.
     Turkey revised its national accounts and finalised the 2007 population census through the new
     address-based population registration system. Further progress is in particular needed in the
     key areas of agricultural and macroeconomic statistics as well as in the field of business
     registers. Cooperation with other data providers and the coordinating role of Turkstat have to
     be further strengthened.




EN                                                   60                                                    EN
      4.19.    Chapter 19: Social policy and employment

     There is no progress to report in the area of labour law. Shortcomings in the transposition of
     a number of directives remain; these include the limited scope of application of the labour
     law. Administrative capacity of the Ministry of Labour and Social Security and its affiliated
     institutions is not yet sufficiently developed. Child labour, including children working on the
     streets, remains a problem. Shortcomings in the legislation with regard to child labour still
     persist, as outlined in the Turkey 2007 Progress Report. Turkey needs to continue its efforts to
     combat child labour (See also the section on Economic and Social Rights). In the area of
     labour law, Turkey is not yet sufficiently prepared.

     There has been some progress in the area of health and safety at work, where Turkey has
     attained a good degree of alignment with the acquis. The Labour Law was revised to prohibit
     workers without the relevant vocational training qualifications from being employed in heavy
     and risky work. The implementing regulation on health and safety measures on risks related to
     chemical agents was amended and came into force in March 2008. The Labour Inspection
     Board started harmonising its inspection practices and further improved its capacity.
     However, major shortcomings remain. In particular, legislation to transpose the Framework
     Directive has not yet been adopted. Existing legislation does not cover all workers in the
     private sector and excludes workers in the public sector. Statistics reveal that there has been a
     significant increase in fatal occupational accidents and diseases in particular in the Tuzla
     shipyards. Further efforts to implement the legislation are needed including through
     awareness-raising, training and strengthening the capacity of the inspection bodies.
     Preparations in this field have started.

     As regards social dialogue, there has been limited progress. Tripartite social dialogue
     meetings were more frequent in the reporting period; however, the Economic and Social
     Council does not meet regularly as required by the law. There has also been some progress
     regarding bipartite social dialogue in certain sectors; however, establishing autonomous and
     bipartite social dialogue structures at all levels is still outstanding, and the number of workers
     covered by collective agreements is still low. Full trade union rights have not yet been
     established in Turkey. The draft legislation aimed at bringing the currently applicable Trade
     Union and Collective Bargaining, Strike and Lockout Laws into line with ILO and EU
     standards is still pending(see also the section on Economic and Social Rights). In the area of
     social dialogue Turkey is not yet sufficiently prepared.

     There has been progress in the area of employment policy. An Employment Package was
     adopted in May 2008 aiming to address unemployment challenges, with a specific focus on
     the promotion of job opportunities for women, young people and people with disabilities. For
     instance, the amendments stipulate, among other things, that the employers' share of social
     security premiums for newly hired women employees are to be covered by the
     Unemployment Insurance Fund for a five-year period, starting with 100% in the first year and
     ending with 20% in the fifth. Unemployed persons registered with the Turkish Employment
     Agency (IŞKUR) will benefit from job matching, guidance and vocational training, to be
     funded by the Unemployment Insurance Fund. IŞKUR continued its efforts to improve its
     institutional capacity and the services provided to job seekers. Turkey also declared 2008 as
     the year for combating undeclared work.

     However, problems remain. In 2007, the unemployment rate remained stable at 9.9 %, but the
     overall employment rate – at 43.1% – again decreased slightly compared to 2006. The labour
     market is characterised by low labour force participation (47.8% in 2007) and low



EN                                                  61                                                    EN
      employment rates, in particular for women (22.2% in 2007), and high levels of youth
     unemployment (19.6% in 2007). The large size of the informal economy (a little under half of
     those in employment are not registered with any social security institution) and the marked
     rural/urban divide in the labour market remain the main challenges. No further progress was
     made in finalising the Joint Assessment Paper on Employment Policy Priorities (JAP): no
     agreement has yet been reached on how to address the employment issues affecting
     vulnerable groups. In the area of employment, Turkey is not yet sufficiently prepared.

     Good progress can be reported on the preparations for the European Social Fund (ESF)
     through the implementation of the component on Human Resources Development of the
     Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA). In December 2007, the Commission adopted
     the Human Resources Development Operational Programme. Its aim is to support activities in
     the areas of employment, education and training, and social inclusion. The Ministry of Labour
     and Social Security has established the internal structures necessary for the management of
     the Operational Programme, staff have been assigned and staff training has been provided.
     The Turkish authorities have accredited the management and control system for implementing
     IPA on a decentralised basis and have requested the conferral of management powers. To
     mobilise stakeholders, awareness raising events were organised. However, administrative
     structures and legislation are not yet sufficiently adapted in order to build up adequate
     institutional capacity for the future management, implementation, monitoring, audit and
     control of ESF-type measures. Preparations in this area are starting.

     There has been limited progress in the field of social inclusion. The Social Insurance and
     General Health Insurance Law entered into force in October 2008. It provides general health
     insurance coverage for everyone under 18 years of age. This includes foreign nationals who
     have resided in Turkey for more than a year and who do not have social insurance in their
     home countries. The health premiums of those who cannot afford to pay are to be covered by
     the State. As part of the Employment Package, social security premiums for the disabled will
     be covered by the State to promote the employment of people with disabilities. However, a
     high incidence of poverty persists in rural areas as well as among employed people (working
     poor) and children. No further progress was made in finalising the JIM (Joint Inclusion
     Memorandum): no agreement has yet been reached on how to address issues of social
     inclusion of vulnerable groups. Sound mechanisms are still outstanding for monitoring
     poverty and social inclusion, as well as the implementation of social inclusion policies, so as
     to measure progress. Preparations in this area are at an early stage.

     In the field of social protection, some progress has been achieved. The most significant pillar
     of the social security reform, the Social Insurance and General Health Insurance Law, entered
     into force in October 2008. Its aim is to regulate, among others, the pension parameters and
     the general health insurance system with a view to ensuring adequate and sustainable
     pensions. The Social Security Institution has been strengthening its capacity to deliver
     decentralised one-stop services for disadvantaged people. However, there has been no
     development as regards new legislation on social assistance and services. Preparations in this
     area have started.

     As regards anti-discrimination and equal opportunities, limited progress was achieved.
     Women's employment rates and access to education are the lowest among the EU Member
     States and the OECD countries. Important general principles and definitions, such as the
     definition of direct and indirect discrimination, are lacking in national law. The acquis
     concerning discrimination on grounds of racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability,
     age and sexual orientation has not yet been transposed. An effective and independent


EN                                                 62                                                   EN
      "Equality Body" still needs to be established to promote non-discrimination and equal
     treatment (see also Section on Economic and Social Rights). Preparations in the field of anti-
     discrimination are at an early stage.

     Conclusion

     Overall, Turkey has made some progress in the field of social policy and employment through
     the adoption of the Employment Package and the Law on Social Insurance and General
     Health Insurance. However, ensuring full trade union rights and combating undeclared work
     require particular attention. Further efforts are also needed in order to combat child labour as
     well as to update and finalise the JAP and JIM documents. Gender equality in economic and
     social life as well as policies to support social inclusion should be improved. In view of ESF
     preparations, there is a need to step up the preparations for effective implementation of the
     Human Resources Development component of IPA. In general, there is a need to increase
     administrative capacity for the effective implementation of the acquis.

     4.20.    Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy

     Turkey made further progress with regard to enterprise and industrial policy principles.
     The revised SME Strategy and SME Action Plan covering the period 2007-2009, which were
     published in November 2007, are largely in line with EU policy principles, including the
     Lisbon strategy. The Ministry of Industry and Trade published investment programmes for
     small industrial estates and organised industrial zones. Both programmes included, as criteria
     for the selection of projects, the ability to facilitate or contribute to the policies and priorities
     set for EU accession. The Coordination Council for the Improvement of Investment
     Environment (YOIKK) adopted a new action plan which consists of a long list of actions
     drawn up by 12 technical committees. Turkey has made preparations for the establishment of
     a revised industrial strategy; however, no industrial strategy document has yet been issued.
     Turkey does not have sufficient mechanisms for the monitoring and evaluation of existing
     policy strategies and action plans.

     There was further progress in improving the business environment. Improvements include
     better systems for paying taxes and trading across borders; a cut in corporate income tax;
     introduction of electronic customs procedures; legislative amendments regarding the setting-
     up of business and working licences; a new Law on Research and Development which
     includes tax reductions on R&D and incentive schemes.

     Some progress was made with respect to enterprise and industrial policy instruments. A
     new decision was issued on financial support extended by the Small and Medium-sized
     Industry Development Organisation (KOSGEB) by increasing the upper limit for loans,
     extending the maturity date and allowing all domestic and foreign banks to take part in
     KOSGEB’s lending schemes, based on protocols to be signed with this institution. Turkey
     officially joined the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme CIP in 2008. The decision
     by the Turkish authorities on ratifying the Memorandum of Understanding is still pending.
     This is preventing the signing of project contracts and the start of operations. No further
     progress has been made with regard to completing alignment with EC Directive 2000/35 on
     combating late payment in commercial transactions.

     Some progress has been made in sector policies. Turkey has reviewed the national
     restructuring programme concerning both the state aid aspects and the market analysis and
     forecast of the Turkish steel industry The Ministry of Industry and Trade published a strategy



EN                                                    63                                                     EN
      for textile, clothing and leather sectors, which aims at improving the competitiveness of these
     sectors and managing their transformation process. Turkey continued its privatisation efforts
     in the reporting period. The total volume of privatisation revenue achieved between July 2007
     and May 2008 was € 4.93 billion, which corresponds to 1% of GDP in 2007, as compared to
     1.5% in 2006.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made some further progress in this chapter. This relates to the adoption of a new
     SME Strategy and Action Plan, improvements in the business environment and continuing
     high foreign direct investment inflows in 2007. There is not a sufficient monitoring and
     evaluation mechanism in place to assess progress on various policy action plans and strategy
     documents. Turkey has not adopted a revised comprehensive industrial strategy. Turkey has
     achieved a reasonable alignment with the acquis in this chapter.

     4.21.   Chapter 21: Trans-European networks

     Turkey is advancing in the area of transport networks and made further progress during the
     reporting period. The Transport Infrastructure Needs Assessment (TINA) has been finalised
     and will provide an agreed basis for the future definition and development of the TEN-T in
     Turkey. Projects preparation is ongoing. However, there is a need for a more reliable system
     of classified transport data.

     In the area of energy networks, the European Community is supporting preparations for
     projects aimed to strengthen a competitive electricity and gas market in the EU, as well as to
     improve its security of supply. The Nabucco natural gas pipeline project from the Caspian and
     Central Asian region to Europe via Turkey is among the highest priority projects of the EU.
     The Turkish authorities have repeatedly confirmed their commitment to the realisation of the
     project. Relevant planning and design are being prepared and are expected to be finalised in
     early 2010. The partner countries in the project are working on an inter-governmental
     agreement with the aim of bringing the pipeline into operation as early as possible. The
     Turkey-Greece pipeline became operational, with a transport capacity of 750 million cubic
     metres annually. Technical preparations to bring the Turkey-Greece-Italy Interconnector
     natural gas pipeline into operation are continuing.

     As regards electricity networks, links are in place with Bulgaria, Syria, Iraq, Iran and
     Azerbaijan, Iran and Georgia. Further interconnections with the European Power Network
     UCTE (Union for the Co-ordination of Transmission of Electricity) are encouraged. Turkey
     gives priority to a number of projects which contribute to the completion of priority axes No.4
     (Greece-Balkan Countries UCTE system) and No.9 (Mediterranean Electricity Ring) of the
     "EU Projects of European Interest". In June 2008, the construction of the Babaeski (Turkey) –
     Filippi (Greece) line has been completed and will allow electricity transfer between both
     countries.

     No progress can be reported in the area of telecommunication networks. Preparations in this
     area are at an early stage.

     Conclusion

     Turkey made some progress in the area of trans-European networks. Preparations for the
     Nabucco natural gas pipeline have started.



EN                                                 64                                                  EN
      4.22.   Chapter 22: Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments

     As regards the legislative framework Turkey made progress, with the law on Development
     Agencies (DA) coming into force in November 2007. This followed the publication of the
     decision and justification by the Constitutional Court on a lawsuit for the suspension of
     implementation and the cancellation of certain articles of the said Law. While annulling
     provisions of the DA law on staff appointment and tax exemption, the Constitutional Court
     decision does allow the full operation of two existing Development Agencies (in Izmir and
     Adana) and the establishment of new ones. The Constitutional Court ruling and its
     justification will be implemented by the Council of State. Regarding IPA, the Competent
     Accrediting Officer and the Audit Authority were designated in November 2007, and the IPA
     Framework Agreement with Turkey was signed in July 2008 and remains to be ratified.
     Preparations in this area are advancing slowly.

     As regards the institutional framework, some limited progress was made. The State
     Planning Organisation started to play a coordinating role in regional policy in the context of
     the new instrument for pre-accession (IPA), the pre-cursor of the Structural and Cohesion
     Funds. Operating Structures-OS (future managing authorities) have been designated for the
     three operational programmes (OP) of component III – Regional Development of IPA and for
     the Human Resources Development operational programme under component IV. During a
     transition period until 2010, the Central Financing and Contracts Unit (CFCU) will be used as
     the implementing agency for the tendering, contracting, payment, accounting and financial
     reporting aspects under components III and IV. A Cooperation Agreement was prepared in
     2007 in order to set out the division of tasks between the OS and the CFCU. So far, no formal
     mechanism, such as an inter-ministerial committee for regional development, has been
     established for the coordination function. Preparations for decentralised management of IPA
     funds under the regional development and human resources development components have
     been significantly delayed. One year after the adoption of the programmes by the Turkish
     authorities their implementation has not started. Turkey has not yet initiated preparations for
     implementation systems for the future Structural and Cohesion Funds. Preparations in this
     area are slowly advancing.

     There has been limited progress on administrative capacity. The training and technical
     assistance provided and on-going through EU assistance for the preparation of the
     implementation of operational programmes under IPA is essentially confined to the central
     level, where some capacity has been built up in the ministries that were designated as
     operating structures. Administrative capacity at regional level continues to be weak; reasons
     for this include the suspension of the DA law and the failure to establish regional structures.
     Involvement of local/regional administrations and stakeholders in programme implementation
     remains very limited. Preparations in this area are slowly advancing.

     As regards programming, good progress was made. The State Planning Organisation has
     prepared the Strategic Coherence Framework (SCF) which sets out Turkey’s strategy for
     implementing components III and IV of IPA over the period 2007-2013, in response to the
     Commission’s multi-annual indicative programme (MIPD). The SCF has been submitted to
     the Commission and four operational programmes (OPs) to implement the strategy - which
     concern environment, transport and regional competitiveness for component III and human
     resources development for component IV - were prepared by the respective ministries
     (environment, transport and industry and trade for component III and labour for component
     IV). OPs were submitted to and approved by the Commission in November and December




EN                                                 65                                                  EN
      2007. Necessary preparatory work on the project pipeline, in particular for the OP on regional
     competitiveness, remains limited. Preparations in this area are slowly advancing.

     Progress was made in the monitoring and evaluation of the operational programmes.
     Operating structures have set up sectoral monitoring committees (SMC) to monitor the
     implementation of OPs. The first two SMC meetings for each OP were held in November
     2007 and June 2008. The membership and rules of procedure of the SMCs have been agreed
     with the Commission. The first meeting of the (all components) joint IPA committee was held
     in July 2008. Each Operating Structure has set up "programme coordination and
     implementation centres" to carry out the actual implementation of each programme. These
     "centres" will also be responsible for evaluating the programmes. Preparations in this area are
     slowly advancing.

     Some progress can be reported in the area of financial management and control (see
     chapter 32 – Financial control), with the establishment of relevant systems and procedures
     under IPA components III and IV. Turkey has not started preparations for financial
     management and control systems for the future Structural and Cohesion Funds. . Preparations
     in this area are slowly advancing.

     Conclusion

     Progress can be reported in adapting the legal framework, in setting up implementation
     structures for implementing IPA components III and IV, and in adopting four operational
     programmes. Further improvement is needed as regards administrative capacity at central
     level in order for designated ministries to be able to take over all functions of the operating
     structures efficiently. At regional level, structures and administrative capacity need to be built
     up. Ownership and accountability need improvement, including examination of the
     distribution of responsibilities between ministries at both central and regional levels and
     stronger involvement of local/regional administrations and stakeholders. Overall, Turkey's
     alignment with the acquis in this chapter is not very advanced.

     4.23.    Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights

     There has been some progress on the judiciary.

     As regards the independence of the judiciary, the selection procedure laid down in the Law on
     judges and prosecutors was amended in December 2007. These amendments transferred into
     law the provisions of the relevant June 2007 regulation of the Ministry of Justice. They
     include specific selection criteria and a transparent scoring system and are, therefore,
     considered an improvement. However, criticism has been voiced by bar associations and
     academics that the new selection criteria are open to subjective interpretation. Two opposition
     parties applied to the Constitutional Court for annulment of certain provisions of the new
     legislation.

     As a result of the November 2007 examinations, the Justice Academy recruited 387 candidate
     judges and prosecutors. Another 397 were recruited following the March 2008 examinations.
     Three more examinations were planned in 2008. However, in response to an appeal by
     YARSAV27 in March 2008, the Council of State suspended the recruitment of a number of
     candidate judges and prosecutors. The Council of State decided that the assessment protocol

     27
             YARSAV is an association of judges and prosecutors.



EN                                                      66                                                EN
      signed between the Ministry of Justice and the Student Selection and Placement Centre
     outlining the procedure for the examination does not comply with the legislation in force. The
     Council of State is due to issue its final decision on the case.

     There has been no progress on the composition of the High Council of Judges and
     Prosecutors28 or on the reporting lines of judicial inspectors29.

     Concerns remain about the impartiality of the judiciary. On occasions, senior members of the
     judiciary or high courts made public comments which sparked a debate in the country that the
     judiciary was going beyond its remit and taking positions on political issues.

     In relation to the professionalism and competence of the judiciary, the Ministry of Justice and
     the Judicial Academy continued to provide training for judges, prosecutors and prison staff.
     This covered issues such as the fight against organised crime, women's rights and, in general,
     the fundamental rights guaranteed by the ECHR and the case law of the ECtHR. However, the
     Justice Academy still has not developed into a strong and independent training provider for
     the entire magistracy, including at regional level. Representatives of civil society have pointed
     out the need to provide training not only on substantive legal issues but also on issues of
     procedural justice.

     As regards the efficiency of the judiciary, judges and lawyers have reported positive results
     from the national judicial network project (UYAP) on court proceedings. Software has been
     developed for use by the provincial probation units in their daily work. UYAP has been made
     available to the national security police so that it can conduct research on persons for whom
     an arrest warrant has been issued. Lawyers are also reportedly using the system increasingly
     following integration of their portal into the network in March 2007.

     In 2007 a total of 846 judges and prosecutors were appointed. The total number of judges and
     prosecutors on 1 May 2008 was 6 914 (6 785 on 1 May 2007) and 3 917 (3 744 on 1 May
     2007) respectively. On the same date (1 May 2008) the total number of vacant posts for
     judges and prosecutors was 4 166. The funds available to the judiciary in 2007 totalled €
     865 million. This covers salaries and social security payments for all members of the
     judiciary, plus services and real estate acquisition.

     However, there have been no developments on establishment of the regional courts of appeal.
     This is a matter of concern. Under the law, these should have been operational by June 2007.
     In addition, provisions introduced under the Criminal Procedure Code, such as return of the
     indictment, mediation and cross-examination, have not been used sufficiently in practice.

     There have been some developments in the area of judicial reform. In spring 2008, the
     Ministry of Justice put a draft strategy on its website. This comprehensive document covers
     issues related to the independence, impartiality, efficiency and effectiveness of the judiciary,
     enhancement of its professionalism, the management system and measures to enhance
     confidence in the judiciary, to facilitate access to justice and to improve the penitentiary
     system. A meeting took place in Antalya, from 20 to 25 May, with judges and prosecutors to


     28
            The composition of the High Council is not representative of the judiciary as a whole; only senior
            members of the judiciary from the Court of Cassation and the Council of State are members of this
            Council.
     29
            The judicial inspectors, who are responsible for evaluating the performance of judges and prosecutors,
            are attached to the ministry rather than to the High Council.



EN                                                       67                                                          EN
      discuss all aspects of the draft strategy. Further and wider consultations with all stakeholders,
     including civil society, and efforts to build the necessary confidence are needed for
     sustainable development and implementation of judicial reform.

     Limited progress can be reported on anti-corruption. Turkey has implemented one third of
     the recommendations made in GRECO's 2005 joint first and second round evaluation report.
     The Ministerial Committee for enhancing transparency and improving good governance is
     continuing to monitor anti-corruption measures. Corruption incidents, involving in particular
     real estate agencies, local government and universities, were frequently reported by the media.
     As a result, law enforcement agencies have conducted a series of high-profile corruption
     investigations in various agencies.

     As regards Members of Parliament and political parties, there is no legislation in place on
     election campaign financing. There has been no development on limiting the broad scope of
     parliamentary immunity. The European Court of Human Rights noted in a ruling that no
     objective criteria had been set to define the conditions under which immunity could be lifted.
     Financial relations between political parties and the media raise questions. The system of
     auditing political parties is not considered adequate.

     Ethical principles for Members of Parliament and other groups of public officials, such as
     academics, the military or the judiciary, are lacking. Certain groups of public officials, such as
     academics, under-secretaries and governors, continue to benefit from a system of
     administrative authorisation for corruption prosecution.

     Several of GRECO's most important recommendations have not been addressed, such as the
     recommendation to entrust a body involving civil society with the responsibility of overseeing
     implementation of national anti-corruption strategies and of proposing new strategies.

     No progress has been made regarding new legislation on the Court of Auditors, nor on
     strengthening parliamentary oversight over public expenditure.

     Concerning transparency in public administration, increasing use has been made of the right
     of access to information. According to official statistics, a total of 939 920 requests for
     information have been submitted by citizens. Public agencies responded positively to 93% of
     them. Both citizens' requests for information and the number of those requests public agencies
     responded to positively have increased since last year. However, in the assessment of the real
     impact of the relevant legislation account should be taken of the fact that the system is
     relatively new and that the board of access to information does not check the reliability of
     these statistics. Another 554 cases in which requests for information were denied have been
     referred to the judiciary.

     Turkey has been criticised by the OECD for its record on implementation of the OECD anti-
     bribery convention concerning the liability of legal persons, its inadequate awareness-raising
     activities and its dismissal of investigation of foreign bribery cases allegedly involving
     Turkish companies.

     Stronger coordination between the relevant government institutions is of key importance.

     As regards fundamental rights, there has been some legislative progress (See also under
     political criteria).




EN                                                  68                                                    EN
      There have been no developments on the institutions monitoring and promoting human rights,
     such as the Human Rights Presidency, which lack independence and resources. The Law on
     the establishment of the ombudsman is still before the Constitutional Court following the veto
     by the President of the Republic in November 2006. The Constitutional Court ordered a stay
     of execution of the Law, but has yet to give its verdict. Finally, Turkey has given no firm
     commitment on participation in the Fundamental Rights Agency.

     As regards prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the
     downward trend in allegations of torture and ill-treatment in the anti-terror departments of
     police stations continued. The legal safeguards introduced by the government's zero tolerance
     policy on torture are having a positive effect. However, the number of appeals to NGOs
     concerning cases of torture and ill-treatment, in particular outside official places of detention,
     has increased. . Pending ratification of the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against
     torture, there is no independent national mechanism in place for monitoring places of
     detention. Furthermore, more efforts are needed to fight impunity.

     With regard to respect for private and family life and, in particular, the right to protection of
     personal data, Turkey needs to align its legislation with the data protection acquis, in
     particular Directive 95/46/EC, and, in that context, to set up a fully independent data
     protection supervisory authority. Turkey also needs to ratify both the CoE Convention for the
     protection of individuals with regard to automatic processing of personal data (CETS No 108)
     and the additional protocol to it on supervisory authorities and trans-border data flow (CETS
     No 181).

     Progress has been made on freedom of thought, conscience and religion, in particular in the
     form of adoption of the Law on foundations. Implementation of this law and resolution of the
     outstanding property-related issues regarding non-Muslim minorities, together with
     intensification of the efforts to address the concerns of the Alevis, remain a challenge. Despite
     the progress made, a legal framework in line with the ECHR has yet to be established, which
     would enable all religious communities to function without undue constraints. This needs to
     be accompanied by stronger efforts to implement the June 2007 circular from the Ministry of
     the Interior in order to create an environment conducive to full respect of this right in practice.

     Regarding freedom of expression, including freedom and pluralism of the media, there has
     been some progress on strengthening the safeguards for freedom of expression in Turkey. In
     April, Parliament adopted amendments to Article 301 of the Criminal Code that, among other
     things, introduce a requirement for permission from the Ministry of Justice to launch a
     criminal investigation. However, the legal restrictions on freedom of expression remain a
     cause for concern. Efforts need to be enhanced and consolidated with a view to ensuring full
     respect of freedom of expression, in law and in practice, in line with the ECHR and the case
     law of the ECtHR.

     As regards freedom of assembly and association, including the right to form political parties
     and the right to establish trade unions, the legal framework for freedom of assembly is
     broadly in line with European standards. However, banned demonstrations have sometimes
     resulted in use of excessive force against demonstrators. The legal framework for freedom of
     association improved with the adoption of the amendments to the Law on foundations in
     February 2008. However, the obligations imposed by the Law on associations to notify the
     authorities before receiving financial support from abroad and to provide detailed documents
     on such support continue to place a burden on associations. The Turkish Chief Public
     Prosecutor applied to the Constitutional Court to close the ruling AKP and to ban members of



EN                                                   69                                                    EN
      the party (including President Gül and Prime Minister Erdoğan) from membership of political
     parties for five years. The Constitutional Court dismissed the application for closure of the
     party on 30 July, as the necessary qualified majority for imposing a ban was not reached.
     However, the Court decided to impose a financial sanction on the party on the grounds that
     some of its activities were considered in contravention of secularism. In the light of this case,
     the legal provisions on political parties need to be amended and brought into line with the
     case law of the ECtHR and best practice in EU Member States, as outlined by the Council of
     Europe's Venice Commission.

     As regards treatment of socially vulnerable and disabled persons and the principle of non-
     discrimination, the State will pay social security premiums to promote employment of people
     with disabilities. As regards mental health, progress has been made on implementation of
     electro-convulsive therapy in hospitals in line with human and patients' rights. However,
     people with disabilities do not benefit from adequate public services. Lack of data and
     research are preventing informed policy-making. Community-based services are not
     sufficiently developed. Insufficient general medical care and treatment remains a problem in
     mental health hospitals and rehabilitation centres.

     Anti-discrimination is enshrined in the constitution and upheld in several laws. However,
     there is no specific protection on grounds of sexual orientation in Turkish law and provisions
     of the Turkish Criminal Code on "public exhibitionism" and "offences against public
     morality" are sometimes used to discriminate against the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transvestite
     and transgender (LGBTT) community. In May 2008, an Istanbul court decided to close down
     an LGBTT organisation, as its statute was considered against general morality. An appeal has
     been lodged before the Council of State in this case. Transsexuals and transvestites are
     occasionally subjected to physical assaults, including by the police. Homophobia has also
     resulted in cases of physical and sexual violence. These allegations are not systematically
     followed up by prompt and effective investigation (See also Chapter 19 – Social policy and
     employment).

     With regard to the right to education, net primary school enrolment increased from 90% in
     the 2006/2007 school year to 97% in 2007/2008. The gender gap in primary education was
     halved from 4.6% to 2.3% over the same period. The Ministry of National Education has
     established an e-school database containing information on school attendance. This enables
     the ministry to identify children out of school and to try to ensure that they are enrolled or to
     provide catch-up education. In May 2008, the Education Board approved the catch-up
     education programme, which is designed to give a second chance to children between 10 and
     14 years of age who either never enrolled or who dropped out. This is targeted mainly on
     working and Roma children. In addition, mobile schools are trying to reach out to children
     working in agriculture. However, children out of school remain a problem: the e-school
     database has revealed that approximately 450 000 children between 6 and 14 years of age are
     out of school.

     On right to property, adoption of the Law on foundations has been a welcome step forward.
     However, it does not address all the problems faced by the non-Muslim religious
     communities. Implementation of the law in line with the ECHR and the case law of the
     ECtHR will be crucial. The outstanding issues also need to be addressed. Finally, the quality
     of the dialogue between the authorities and the communities concerned will be instrumental in
     creating an environment conducive to achieving progress.




EN                                                  70                                                   EN
      With regard to gender equality and women's rights, some progress has been made, in
     particular on combating honour killings and domestic violence. Although the overall legal
     framework guaranteeing gender equality is in place, further big efforts need to be made if the
     gap between men and women in economic participation and opportunity, educational
     attainment, access to healthcare, survival and political empowerment is to be closed.

     As regards the rights of the child, there has been progress on access to social services and the
     juvenile justice system. However, efforts need to continue in all areas related to children's
     rights.

     With regard to liberty and security and the right to a fair trial, reports indicate that in urban
     areas most detainees have access to a lawyer immediately after detention. In rural areas,
     however, in particular in the south-east of the country, there have been cases where
     defendants have not had access to a lawyer on terms equivalent to those in urban areas. In
     courts, professional interpretation in languages other than Turkish remains an issue of
     concern.

     As regards minority rights and cultural rights, Turkey has made limited progress on ensuring
     respect for and protection of minorities in accordance with European standards. Turkey has
     also made limited progress in the area of cultural rights. Significant further efforts are
     required, in particular on use of languages other than Turkish in broadcasting, in political life
     and when accessing public services.

     There have been no developments as regards EU citizens' rights.

     Conclusion

     As regards the judiciary, there has been some progress, in particular on establishment of a
     judicial reform strategy. However, concerns remain about the independence and impartiality
     of the judiciary. The reform strategy is expected to address these issues.

     Limited progress can be reported on anti-corruption. The government has continued to
     implement its initiatives. However, there is no legislation in place that would guarantee
     transparency of election campaign financing. There has been no progress on the immunity of
     Members of Parliament. Codes of ethics and/or conduct for Members of Parliament and other
     groups of public officials are lacking and an anti-corruption strategy and action plan need to
     be developed and to receive the political support necessary for implementation.

     As regards fundamental rights, there has been some legislative progress, but vigorous further
     efforts need to be made to ensure full respect of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the
     ECHR and the case law of the ECtHR.

     4.24.    Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security

     Some progress can be reported on migration. The asylum and migration task force formed a
     high-level working group bringing together agencies responsible for border tasks connected
     with irregular migration. It aims for closer inter-agency cooperation by conducting common
     risk analyses.

     A total of 64 290 illegal migrants were apprehended in 2007 and 33,143 in the first seven
     months of 2008. Capacity to accommodate illegal migrants has been increased from 1 512 to
     1 793.


EN                                                  71                                                   EN
      Turkey proposed a readmission agreement to Afghanistan. A first round of negotiations on a
     readmission agreement with Pakistan was held. However, Turkey has not pursued the
     negotiations on a readmission agreement with the European Community since December
     2006.

     Limited progress can be reported on management of irregular migrants in Turkey. However,
     the detention and deportation procedures need to be improved to ensure that the authorities
     systematically give written reasons for such decisions in a language the persons concerned
     can understand. It should be possible to submit detention and removal decisions to a senior
     administrative, and possibly also judicial, review. The duration of detention should be limited
     by law or – at least in cases of prolonged detention – regularly reviewed.

     The material conditions of detention of apprehended irregular migrants during detention need
     to be improved. Facilities could be improved to ensure that detainees are segregated not only
     by gender but also by age and criminal record. Family members should have the possibility to
     stay together.

     Access for detained irregular migrants to free legal aid, to asylum procedures, to interpretation
     services, to psychological and medical assistance and to educational and recreational
     activities, along with the possibility of accommodating unaccompanied minors in reception
     facilities outside detention centres, needs to be further developed, including by closer
     cooperation between the national and international organisations specialising in delivering
     these services and the authorities managing detention facilities.

     No specific training or training curricula exist for staff working in the migration area. There is
     no compatible data system on migration.

     Arbitrary cases of refoulement, although not numerous, remain a high concern.

     In the area of asylum, limited progress has been made. Turkey continues to impose its
     geographical limitation on the 1951 Convention relating to the status of refugees and the
     related 1967 Protocol. The Ministry of Interior continued to work with the UNHCR to train
     officials in preparation for decentralisation of decision-making. The department for
     foreigners, borders and asylum in the Turkish National Police has started to prepare to take
     over the country of origin information system. Extensive work is underway to improve
     administrative capacity and streamline asylum procedures. The Ministry of Interior has also
     initiated the internal administrative procedures to set up an asylum management unit, as the
     first step towards a dedicated authority able to manage both reception and integration issues.

     In 2007, 5 846 requests for asylum were made, a 65% increase compared to 2006 (3 541
     applications). In the first eight months of 2008 another 2 364 applications were registered.
     The total number of applications being processed (investigation phase) increased to 15562
     (6 622 Iraqis, 5 449 Iranians, 1 260 Somalis, 1 279 Afghans among others). So far,
     44 applicants have been granted refugee status. The Turkish government spent the equivalent
     of USD 550 000 in 2007 (compared with USD 135 000 in 2006) to cover the basic needs of
     all asylum seekers – recognised refugees and “temporary asylum seekers” or “guests”.

     Given the increase in the number of asylum applications to Turkey, the revision of the
     Asylum Law and the establishment of the new asylum unit are important. Pending these two
     structural reforms, fair, equal and consistent access for everyone to asylum procedures, to
     legal aid and, in particular, to UNHCR staff, especially at Turkey’s international airports and



EN                                                  72                                                    EN
      detention centers, is crucial. Another important task is to reduce the waiting time for asylum
     procedures and to eliminate disparities between cities’ mechanism for referral to the social
     solidarity foundation.

     Training for Turkish officials on refugee status determination procedures needs to continue.
     Measures need to be taken to ensure that trained staff remains within the asylum and
     migration system. Mobilisation of and cooperation with NGOs and local authorities are the
     keys to integration of asylum seekers. Another important point is to facilitate the self-reliance
     of refugees by reducing the fees for the six-month temporary residence permit.

     No progress can be reported on visa policy. Sticker- and stamp-type visas are still issued at
     borders, with different authorities responsible for the issuing procedures, and airport transit
     visas have not been introduced. Following the training received by 200 staff in 2007, there has
     been a slight increase in the detection rate for forged documents. In 2007, 493 documents
     were identified as false and falsified, compared with 469 in 2006. No development can be
     reported on alignment with EU visa lists. There are several countries on the EU's negative list
     whose citizens can enter into Turkey without a visa. Citizens of 16 Member States are under a
     visa obligation when travelling to Turkey.

     There has been limited progress on alignment with the acquis concerning external borders
     and Schengen. The number of border crossing points has been increased from 116 to 120.
     Modernisation of six border crossing points was completed in 2008; work is in progress on
     five more. A "Common Manual of Checks at the EU external borders" was published in 1500
     copies and distributed for the use of the organisations performing border duties (General
     Staff, National Police, Customs Undersecretary, Gendarmerie and the Coast Guard). The
     manual will serve the purpose of being used as a practical tool to integrate EU requirements
     while carrying out their tasks. However, border staff shows very limited awareness of the
     Turkish national strategy on integrated border management or of the action plan to implement
     it. Efforts need to be stepped up and systemised with a view to implementing the national
     action plan on integrated border management. The inter-agency group put in place to discuss
     implementation of the action plan has met only occasionally. In the absence of the new border
     law enforcement authority, it is crucial further to enhance cooperation between all agencies
     working at borders by developing joint risk analyses, exchanges of information and
     cooperation on investigation and training. To provide specialised training, a new department
     on border security studies has been established within the police academy. Further emphasis
     needs to be placed on the training and professionalism of the border police, especially on
     development of language skills.

     The data on EU citizens’ entry documents raise concerns, as they are not in line with the EU
     acquis. Closer cross-border cooperation with neighbouring countries is a key component of
     well-functioning border management.

     As regards judicial cooperation in civil matters, a new Law on international private and
     procedural law has been adopted. A Law implementing the 1980 Hague Convention on child
     abduction was also adopted.

     No progress can be reported on judicial cooperation in criminal matters. Cooperation is
     ensured by means of international and bilateral agreements and, in the absence there, on the
     basis of reciprocity and international customary law. Key pending issues are related to
     effective implementation of relevant Council of Europe conventions, especially on mutual
     legal assistance and on extradition. Turkey has not signed key international conventions, such



EN                                                  73                                                   EN
      as the Second Additional Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on mutual legal
     assistance or the Convention on cybercrime. Turkey needs to take the necessary steps to sign
     a cooperation agreement with Eurojust.

     In the area of police cooperation, limited progress has been achieved. A code of ethics for
     law enforcement agents in line with international standards has been adopted. Turkey has
     signed a number of bilateral agreements on police cooperation. The lack of legislation on
     protection of personal data and the absence of an independent supervisory authority is
     obstructing the conclusion of an operational cooperation agreement with Europol (a strategic
     cooperation agreement has been in force since 2004). This also creates difficulties when it
     comes to cooperating at international level. Closer cooperation and communication between
     law enforcement agencies, and also with the judiciary, is of key importance.

     Some progress has been observed in the fight against organised crime. A new Law on
     witness protection was adopted, with adequate provisions to guarantee the confidentiality of
     their identity and their security. This is expected to improve the chances of convictions in
     organised crime cases. The Regulation on the principles and procedures governing controlled
     delivery was extended to include the coast guard and the customs administration, in addition
     to the gendarmerie and the police. Following adoption of a Law on cybercrime, an internet
     department was established under the telecommunications authority to take charge of
     monitoring, supervision and coordination and some implementing legislation was adopted.
     Expertise in forensics is good. However, establishment of a national fingerprint and DNA
     database and adoption of harmonised crime scene investigation practices remain key issues.
     One important point is that the strategy against organised crime, in line with EU best practice,
     needs to be followed up by a specific action plan and implemented accordingly. Special
     investigative techniques need to be developed and relevant training provided.

     Progress has continued on combating trafficking in human beings. The task force on
     combating human trafficking was systemised and expanded to include local administrations.
     Collection of statistics was standardised. Some 308 traffickers were arrested in 2007. As of
     September 2008, 212 traffickers were arrested. The free emergency helpline and the two
     centres for victims of trafficking continue to operate. Further efforts were made to promote
     the 157 helpline. By September 2008, 98 victims had been identified, 61 of whom were
     returned voluntarily to their countries of origin and six of whom remain in the centres,
     pending procedures for their return. The Witness Protection Law entered into force. It protects
     the identity of victims of human trafficking who agree to testify against the perpetrators and
     opens the way to include them in a witness protection programme. There are now court
     precedents on the application of a recent amendment of the Penal Code stipulating tougher
     penalties for human trafficking. Inter-agency cooperation could be improved with the aid of
     common operations and training activities. It is of key importance that Turkey signs the
     Council of Europe Convention on action against trafficking in human beings. Solutions
     allowing sustained funding are necessary for the free emergency helpline and for the centres.

     (For the fight against money laundering see Chapter 4).

     As regards the fight against terrorism, the Supreme Council on Counter-terrorism remains
     the leading authority. Following adoption of the Law on the prevention of laundering
     proceeds of crime, implementing legislation was adopted requiring the report of suspicious
     transactions connected with financing of terrorism to the Financial Crimes Investigation
     Board (MASAK). A special unit to fight financing of terrorism has been established under
     MASAK. MASAK received 144 reports of suspicious transactions connected with financing



EN                                                 74                                                   EN
      of terrorism in 2007, compared with 8 in 2006. Turkey has ratified neither the International
     Convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism nor the Council of Europe
     Convention on the prevention of terrorism. Compliance with nine special Financial Action
     Task Force recommendations on financing of terrorism needs to be pursued, particularly on
     freezing and confiscation of terrorist assets.

     Some progress has been made in the fight against drugs. Following adoption of a national
     strategy in line with the EU drug strategy and the EU drug action plan for 2005-2012, an
     action plan (2007-2009) was brought into force. The national Reitox focal point is the
     coordinator of the action plan and chairs the coordination board meetings on a quarterly basis
     to monitor implementation. The agreement concerning the participation of Turkey in the
     European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) has been signed. It is
     of key importance that Turkey takes the steps necessary to ratify the agreement so that it can
     be implemented without delay. A parliamentary commission was established to examine the
     problems related to drug addiction and supply reduction. Successful operations resulting in
     sizeable seizures were mounted by the Turkish law enforcement bodies. Joint action on
     controlled deliveries was carried out. However, the mandate of the national Reitox focal point
     is limited, its human resources capacity is weak and it still lacks an autonomous budget. A
     more balanced approach to drugs supply and demand reduction needs to be backed up by
     strengthening cooperation between institutions, developing a network of treatment and
     rehabilitation facilities and enhancing the data collection system in Turkey. The question of
     drugs remains serious as the country is a major transiting country.

     There has been some progress on customs cooperation. The administrative and operational
     capacity of the Under-secretariat of Customs was improved by increasing its scanning
     systems. The relevant implementing regulation was amended to authorise the customs
     administration to implement controlled delivery in addition to the police, gendarmerie and
     coast guard. However, it is important to make more efforts on inter-agency cooperation and
     implementation of risk management within the Under-secretariat of Customs. The lack of
     legislation on the protection of personal data and the absence of an independent supervisory
     authority remain a difficulty in cooperation at regional and international levels.

     Conclusion

     Overall, some progress can be reported, particularly to prevent drugs and human trafficking.
     Alignment with the acquis in this chapter is underway, but sustained efforts are required in
     areas such as visa policy and judicial co-operation in criminal matters. The same applies to
     the fight against organised crime, which remains a serious concern. The capacity to manage
     asylum and migration needs to be improved. Efforts need to be stepped up to implement the
     national action plan on integrated border management. The negotiations for an EC-Turkey
     readmission agreement need to be re-launched.

     4.25.   Chapter 25: Science and research

     Good progress can be reported in the area of science and research policy. A new law to
     encourage research and technological development activities was adopted in March 2008.
     (See Chapter 20 – Enterprise and industrial policy). A national human resources strategy and
     an accompanying action plan to increase the number of researchers and improve their
     distribution by professions and sectors were developed. A number of new programmes
     continued to support research, technology and innovation, with increased budgets and




EN                                                75                                                  EN
      efficiency. Turkey’s active cooperation with the Joint Research Centre continued, in
     accordance with the memorandum of understanding signed in July 2007.

     Turkey continued to be associated with the 7th Framework Programme for research and
     technological development (FP7). Its participation in the first calls organised under FP7 in
     2007 was greater than under FP6. A good number of projects were submitted and evaluated in
     the different thematic areas funded under FP7. However, in terms of success rate, there is
     room for improvement. Turkey’s requested to be associated with the Seventh Euratom
     Research Framework Programme (2007-2013).

     As regards Turkey’s integration into the European Research Area, Turkey took several steps
     to improve the mobility of researchers, including by taking full part in EURAXESS (the
     European mobility portal), and to increase investment in research and international
     cooperation. As a result, Turkey is further integrated into the European Research Area. This
     facilitates research cooperation at European level.

     Conclusion

     Good progress has been achieved in the area of science and research. Overall, Turkey is well
     prepared in this chapter and is on track for integration into the European Research Area.

     4.26.   Chapter 26: Education and culture

     As regards education, training and youth, there has been good progress over the reporting
     period. The new Lifelong Learning and Youth in Action programmes attracted a growing
     number of applications and the National Agency responsible for these programmes continued
     to ensure sound and efficient management. Eighty out of the eighty-one provinces were
     covered by the Lifelong Learning programme in 2007 further to measures adopted by the
     Turkish authorities and the National Agency to encourage the programme's nation-wide
     coverage. However, implementation of these programmes in 2008 has been hindered by a lack
     of funds because Turkey did not pay its total contribution in time.

     Turkey is at an advanced stage of implementation of the Bologna process reforms in higher
     education. It needs to continue its efforts towards implementation of a national qualifications
     framework improving recognition of prior learning and widening access to higher education.

     Regarding the Education and Training 2010 Work Programme, Turkey continued to improve
     its performance on early school leavers, on completion of upper secondary education, and on
     maths, science and technology graduates but not on participation of adults in lifelong learning.
     A vocational qualifications authority was set up. Its task is to establish a national
     qualifications system, including licensing, accreditation, assessment and certification
     procedures, and to link this national system to the European qualifications framework.

     Turkey continued to participate in the Culture Programme (2007–2013). The Law on Istanbul
     as the 2010 cultural capital of Europe was adopted. Turkey has signed, but not yet ratified, the
     UNESCO Convention on the protection and promotion of the diversity of cultural
     expressions.

     Conclusion




EN                                                 76                                                   EN
      There has been good progress in the areas of education, training, youth and culture. However,
     Turkey needs to provide its total financial contribution to Community programmes in time in
     order to ensure their smooth implementation.

     4.27.   Chapter 27: Environment

     In the field of horizontal legislation, some progress can be reported. The Environmental
     Impact Assessment (EIA) directive has been transposed to a large degree. However
     procedures for consulting the public and trans-boundary consultations are not fully aligned.
     Turkey has not yet signed the Kyoto Protocol and Turkey is not a party to the Espoo and
     Aarhus Conventions. The Emissions Trading Directive has not been transposed. A greenhouse
     gas emission trading scheme has not yet been established. Transposition of the Strategic
     Environmental Assessment (SEA) Directive is at an early stage. There has been no progress
     on transposition of the acquis on environmental liability, public participation and public
     access to environmental information. Nor has Turkey yet started negotiations on the
     memorandum of understanding with on its participation in the Community civil protection
     financial instrument.

     In the case of air quality, Turkey has made good progress in alignment with the air quality
     framework legislation and daughter directives. Progress has also been made on the sulphur
     content of liquid fuels in domestic heating systems. The administrative capacity for regional
     air quality has been improved by establishing a clean air centre in Marmara. No progress has
     been made on legislation related to the acquis on emissions of volatile organic compounds, on
     the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels or on national emission ceilings.

     Some progress can be reported on alignment with the waste management acquis.
     Implementing legislation on polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB & PCT) and on the control of
     waste oils has been adopted. Furthermore, restriction of use of certain hazardous substances in
     electrical and electronic equipment and on restoration and management of extractive industry
     sites has been adopted. Alignment in this area is well advanced. However, Turkey does not
     have a national waste management plan. Progress on end-of-life vehicles and waste electrical
     and electronic equipment has been very limited. No progress has been made regarding the
     directives on landfill.

     There has been little progress in the area of water quality. An amendment was made to the
     legislation on prevention of water pollution. However, the overall level of alignment remains
     low. The institutional framework for water management is not organised on a river basin
     basis. Trans-boundary consultations on water issues are at an early stage.

     Limited progress can be reported on nature protection. Turkey has aligned with the acquis
     regarding establishment and management of zoos. However, the level of harmonisation and
     implementation remains very low. The continuing loss of habitats is a cause for concern. The
     list of potential Natura 2000 sites has not yet been compiled. A framework law on nature
     protection and implementing legislation on birds and habitats have not yet been adopted. A
     national biodiversity strategy and action plan have been prepared, but not yet adopted by the
     government.

     No progress can be reported regarding industrial pollution control and risk management.
     Turkey has aligned with some provisions of the Seveso II Directive and with the Large
     Combustion Plants and Waste Incineration Directives. However, overall transposition and




EN                                                 77                                                  EN
      implementation remain very low. Introduction of an integrated permit system is at an early
     stage.

     There has been limited progress in the field of chemicals. The legislation on dangerous
     chemicals has been amended. Overall, the level of transposition remains low. The capacity for
     effective implementation is insufficient.

     No progress can be reported on genetically modified organisms.

     Progress has been made in the field of noise. Following adoption of the implementing
     legislation Turkey is approaching full alignment with the acquis in this area. However,
     preparation of noise maps and action plans is at an early stage.

     Some further progress has been made in the area of administrative capacity. A substantial
     number of staff was recruited and trained by the Ministry of Environment and
     Forestry(MoEF). A new department for implementation of the environment programmes
     under IPA has been established in the Ministry. The Directorate-General for State Hydraulic
     Works is now affiliated to the MoEF. However, no progress has been made on establishment
     of a national environment agency. Responsibilities, such as inspection activities and nature
     protection, are not clearly defined. Administrative capacity needs further strengthening,
     including coordination between the relevant authorities at all levels. Mainstreaming of
     environmental protection into other policy areas and ensuring that new investments comply
     with the environmental acquis are at an early stage. Some of the existing legislation, such as
     the Mining Law, which includes gold mining, and the tourism legislation, are causing major
     damage to natural areas.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made progress in the area of air quality and good progress on strengthening the
     administrative capacity at central level. Some progress can be reported on waste, water and
     nature protection. However, the overall level of alignment remains low. Turkey has made no
     progress in the areas of industrial pollution and risk management and GMOs. Limited
     progress can be reported on chemicals. Delays in establishment of the EIA are hampering
     further improvements in implementation and enforcement.

     4.28.   Chapter 28: Consumer and health protection

     Turkey has made some progress in the field of consumer protection. As regards enforcement
     of market surveillance legislation, the skills of relevant personnel have been enhanced
     considerably. In addition, the amount of the fines has increased further. However, reliable
     data on the fines imposed are lacking. Considering the size of the country, the operational
     budget for market surveillance is small. Turkey is not applying a unified method for data
     gathering. The consumer movement is weak, cooperation and partnership between the
     existing NGOs are limited and NGOs suffer from lack of funds. Their relationship with State
     bodies is weak. Preparations in this field are underway.

     Progress has been made on product-safety related issues. Awareness of consumer product
     safety amongst the relevant authorities has increased and coordination between the relevant
     market surveillance authorities has improved, although it still remains weak. Preparations in
     this area are on track.




EN                                                78                                                  EN
      In the area of non-safety related issues, Turkey is preparing to establish an internet consumer
     portal. However, the number of legally qualified staff in the Ministry of Industry and Trade
     continues to lag behind. There is very limited follow-up of decisions of the advisory
     Consumer Council. Consistent interpretation and comprehension of consumer legislation by
     the courts and arbitration committees is not always ensured. Preparations in this field are on
     track.

     In the case of public health, Turkey has made some progress. With regard to tobacco, an
     important amendment of the Law on Prevention of damages of tobacco products was adopted
     in January. It aims to transpose the tobacco advertising directive and, beyond this, it bans
     internet sales of tobacco, and smoking scenes in films on screen. The law also extended the
     smoking ban to all indoor public areas and certain open-air areas as from July 2009.
     Administrative capacity has been improved, by introducing a clearer division of
     responsibilities between the Ministry of Health and the Tobacco and Alcohol Market
     Regulatory Authority. Tobacco control units have been established at provincial level to
     improve enforcement of the smoking ban. However, legal alignment with tobacco product
     regulation acquis, especially as regards high tar yields and oral tobacco still remain to be
     done. Preparations in this field are well on track.

     In the field of communicable diseases, Turkey has made good progress. A strategic plan
     (2008-2012) has set clear milestones for completion of alignment, enforcement and the
     necessary changes to the institutional framework. The Ministry of Health has strengthened the
     institutional capacity for investigation and management of possible epidemics. A needs
     analysis was carried out to identify the resources required for epidemiological surveillance.
     This is a key element next to the early warning and response system (EWRS) for the
     accession negotiations on this chapter. Throughout the country over 7 000 medical staff have
     been trained. However, notwithstanding the increasing numbers of reported HIV cases, HIV
     prevention policies are not seen as a priority by the Government. Access to information on
     HIV/AIDS is very limited. Preparations in this area are well on track.

     As regards blood and blood components, Turkey has made progress. A strategic review of the
     blood transfusion system is underway. These are key elements for the accession negotiations
     on this chapter. Concerning tissue and cells, legal alignment remains outstanding.
     Administrative capacity is not sufficiently developed but the establishment of a National Cell
     Coordination Center in July 2008 is a right step to overcome this shortcoming. Preparations in
     these fields have started.

     No progress can be reported on mental health. Community-based services are not sufficiently
     developed as an alternative to institutionalisation, and resources continue to be limited in
     relation to the needs. A problem of insufficient general medical care and treatment persists in
     mental health hospitals and rehabilitation centres for people with mental disabilities.
     Preparations in this area are at an early stage.

     Some progress can be reported in the area of socio-economic determinants of health. In 2008,
     half of the population will be provided with family medicine and primary level healthcare
     services. Progress can be reported in the area of cancer control programmes. However, the
     implementation of the Council recommendation on cancer screening that recommends
     population-based, organised screening for breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer has not been
     achieved yet. Preparations in these fields have started.

     Conclusion



EN                                                 79                                                  EN
      Overall, further progress has been made on consumer and health protection. A satisfactory
     level of legal alignment has been reached. However, in the area of consumer protection, more
     efforts remains necessary, in particular in the field of non-safety related issues and to ensure
     due enforcement of consumer protection in general. Preparations for completing legal
     alignment in the areas of blood and blood components, tissues and cells are underway.

     4.29.   Chapter 29: Customs union

     Turkey has made further progress with customs legislation. The Under-secretariat of
     Customs adopted a communiqué on the rules and procedures for implementation of binding
     tariff information (BTI). The communiqué designated the regional customs directorates in six
     cities, which have customs laboratories, to issue BTIs upon request by traders. Implementing
     legislation on temporary importation of road vehicles has been published but the ongoing
     practice is not fully in line with the acquis. There has been no progress on the duty relief
     legislation, which is partly not in line with Turkey’s Customs Union obligations. Abolition of
     duty relief for goods covered by the Customs Union and sold in duty-free shops to travellers
     entering Turkey is a key component of the accession negotiations on this chapter.

     Legislation on free-trade zones remains not in line with the acquis, as the zones are
     considered as areas outside the Turkish customs territory.

     Good progress has been made by the Under-secretariat of Customs to strengthen its
     administrative and operational capacity. Five vehicle- and container- scanning systems
     were deployed at Gurbulak customs office and the ports of Istanbul Ambarli, Izmir, Alsancak,
     Mersin and Samsun. The Under-secretariat of Customs signed a protocol with the Energy
     Market Regulatory Authority with a view to exchanging information on activities to combat
     smuggling of fuel products. The Under-secretariat of Customs adopted its risk management
     strategy. However, an integrated IT-based risk management system has not yet been
     implemented in all customs offices. An overall IT strategy of the Under-secretariat of
     Customs has not been adopted. Activities on IT interconnectivity with the EU systems in the
     fields of transit (NCTS) and tariffs (TARIC, quota and surveillance) are underway.

     The rate of import and export declarations that were processed electronically into the
     electronic data interchange system (EDIS) increased. At present, Turkish customs procedures
     are integrated into the system and virtually all declarations are processed electronically.

     Further efforts were made to improve training. Intensive in-service training was provided on
     origin matters, outward processing and sniffer dogs. Enforcement of intellectual property
     rights (IPR) by the Under-secretariat of Customs is a cause for concern and needs to be
     improved substantially. The level of coordination between the Under-secretariat and other
     relevant IPR public authorities, including the Turkish national police, is low. The
     modernisation efforts need to be increased.

     “Customs Union” is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey adopted
     by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and endorsed
     by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in place on
     the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or where the
     last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position fully to implement the acquis
     relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion



EN                                                 80                                                   EN
      Overall, some progress has been made in this chapter both as regards legislative alignment
     and administrative capacity. Turkey's customs legislation is highly aligned with the EU
     acquis, thanks to the Customs Union. Turkey needs to make further efforts to align its
     legislation and practices on duty-free shops, free-trade zones, customs duty relief, transit,
     fight against counterfeit goods and post-clearance. Additional efforts are needed to fight
     against counterfeit goods.

     4.30.   Chapter 30: External relations

     Turkey has made limited progress regarding the common commercial policy.

     The level of alignment with the EC common commercial policy is high. Some longstanding
     infringements of the Customs Union remain unresolved and are continuing to distort bilateral
     trade relations. There has been no further progress on alignment of the Turkish general system
     of preferences (GSP). The non-harmonised areas of the Turkish general system of preferences
     (GSP) remain unchanged, particularly its geographical and product coverage.

     Extensive use of safeguard measures has a negative effect on EU commercial policy, as they
     affect EU exporters. In 2008, Turkey imposed two more safeguard measures on the
     importation of spectacles and handbags. In addition, it initiated two safeguard proceedings on
     electrical appliances and cotton yarns, the latter being the fourteenth proceeding opened by
     Turkey since 2004.

     The level of coordination between Turkey and the EU within the World Trade Organisation,
     in particular as regards the Doha Development Agenda and the OECD, has improved.
     However, there is room for further improvements in this area.

     No progress can be reported on medium- and long-term export credits to companies. There
     has been some progress on dual-use goods. Turkey amended rules for export-licensing of
     nuclear and nuclear dual-use goods and inter alia introduced catch-all controls through their
     Article 6.

     Concerning bilateral agreements with third countries, Turkey granted unilateral
     preferential treatment to Kosovo. The Free Trade Agreement with Albania was ratified by
     Parliament and has entered into force. Turkey has maintained a satisfactory level of alignment
     with the EC’s bilateral agreements.

     In the field of development policy and humanitarian aid, some progress has been made.
     Turkey granted some 602 million USD of official development aid in 2007. Turkey’s level of
     alignment remains satisfactory in this field.

     “External Relations” is one of the eight chapters covered by the conclusions on Turkey
     adopted by the Council (General Affairs and External Relations) on 11 December 2006 and
     endorsed by the European Council on 14/15 December 2006. As long as restrictions remain in
     place on the free movement of goods carried by vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus or
     where the last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position fully to implement the
     acquis relating to this chapter.

     Conclusion




EN                                                 81                                                  EN
      Turkey has achieved a high level of alignment in this area, but it is not complete, in particular
     in the WTO and OECD fora. The disproportionate use of safeguard measures and
     longstanding trade irritants has an impact on proper functioning of the Customs Union.

     4.31.    Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy

     The regular political dialogue between the EU and Turkey has continued to cover
     international issues of common interest, including Iraq, Iran, the South Caucasus and the
     Middle East peace process. (Concerning neighbourly relations with other enlargement
     countries and member states, see Political criteria).

     Turkey continued to support efforts to achieve stability, security and national reconciliation in
     Iraq. Turkey has been active in the "Iraq neighbour process" and hosted the November 2007
     ministerial meeting in Istanbul. Cross-border terrorist activities of the PKK, listed on the EU
     list of terrorist organisations, pose a security challenge to Turkey. In this context, Turkey
     started air strikes in December 2007, and in February 2008 undertook a nine-day ground
     operation in Northern Iraq. In parallel, Turkey intensified diplomatic exchanges with Iraqi
     authorities and, for the first time, engaged in official contacts with the Kurdish regional
     government. A Turkish delegation met in October with the President and the Prime Minister
     of the Kurdish Regional Government. In March the President of Iraq paid an official visit to
     Turkey. In July Turkey and Iraq signed an agreement on the establishment of a High Council
     for Strategic Relations.

     As regards Iran, Turkey supports the EU position on Iran’s nuclear programme and
     encouraged Iran to engage in a diplomatic solution of the crisis in line with the June 2008
     offer of the E3+3. Turkey has engaged in negotiations with Iran on a comprehensive energy
     agreement. In August, the two countries signed a co-operation agreement to fight against
     terrorism, drug trafficking and organized crime. The President of Iran paid a working visit to
     Istanbul in August.

     As for relations with the Southern Caucasus, Turkey maintains close relations with
     Azerbaijan and Georgia. Jointly with the Presidents of Georgia and Azerbaijan, Turkey
     inaugurated the construction of the Baku-Alkhalkalaki-Kars railway in November 2007. As
     concerns relations with Armenia, while Turkey kept its land border with this country closed,
     Turkey's President paid the first ever visit of the kind to Erevan, raising hopes for a new start
     in bilateral relations. Official discussions also took place between the Armenian and Turkish
     Foreign Ministers. Turkey maintained its offer to establish a joint commission of historians. In
     reaction to the August Russo-Georgian conflict, Turkey has underlined the importance of
     Georgian territorial integrity and sovereignty. At the same time, Turkey kept communication
     channels with Russia open. Following the conflict, Turkey played a conciliatory role and
     proposed to set up a "Caucasus Co-operation and Stability Platform" in which all countries of
     the region would be represented. Furthermore, Turkey has started efforts to facilitate the
     solution of the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh. A first ever trilateral meeting took place
     between the Foreign Ministers of Turkey, Azerbaijan and Armenia in September.

     Turkey has been playing an active and constructive role in the Middle East. In line with the
     EU position, Turkey continued to support the Middle East peace process, including the
     Annapolis process. Turkey expressed support for Palestinian unity and reconciliation. In
     November 2007, the Presidents of Israel and of the Palestinian Authority made speeches
     before the Turkish Parliament. Turkey brokered indirect talks between Syria and Israel with a
     view to preparing a peace agreement between the two countries. In May and in June 2008 two



EN                                                  82                                                   EN
      rounds of indirect talks took place in Istanbul. Turkey made efforts to contribute to the
     national reconciliation process in Lebanon, and welcomed the Doha Agreement under the
     auspices of the Arab League.

     Turkey welcomed the Commission's 2007 Communication on the Black Sea Synergy and
     wishes to see a more active role of the EU in Black Sea regional cooperation. The Turkish
     Foreign Minister participated in the 14 February 2008 Meeting in Kyiv of the Foreign
     Ministers of the countries of the EU and of the wider Black Sea Area. In November 2007,
     Turkey handed over the rotating chairmanship of the BSEC organisation to Ukraine.

     Turkey continued with efforts to bring together Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Turkish
     Foreign Ministry continued efforts to develop the April 2007 "Ankara Declaration", which
     provides both countries with a trilateral platform to discuss their problems. On the occasion of
     the International Conference in support to Afghanistan in June 2008 Turkey pledged to double
     its contribution for reconstruction. Furthermore, Turkey remains engaged with 800 troops it
     contributes to ISAF, and contributes to civil and military capacity building. Turkey has
     intensified its relations with the Gulf States, particularly Qatar. A decision has been taken to
     open 10 new embassies in Africa.

     Turkey’s broad alignment with common foreign and security policy (CFSP) statements,
     declarations, and demarches continued. In 2008, Turkey aligned itself with 109 out of 124
     CFSP declarations. Turkey did not follow the EU position expressed in statements concerning
     Iran (one case on freedom of expression), Russia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, China, Sudan, Belarus
     and Mauritania.

     No particular developments can be reported as regards restrictive measures.

     As regards non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, Turkey is party to all the
     existing international arrangements. In December 2007, parliament adopted secondary
     legislation to implement the UN Chemical Weapons Convention.

     Turkey has not aligned with the EU position on membership of certain suppliers' groups, such
     as the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use
     Goods and Technologies. (For dual-use goods, see chapter 30 – External relations).

     With regard to cooperation with international organisations, Turkey made no progress
     towards signing the Statute of the International Criminal Court. Turkey will be holding a non-
     permanent seat in the UN Security Council during the term 2009-2010.

     There have been no particular developments with regard to security measures.

     Within the framework of the European security and defence policy (ESDP), Turkey
     continues to contribute to the EU-led military mission EUFOR/ALTHEA in Bosnia and
     Herzegovina. Turkey is also supporting the EU-led police missions EUPM in Bosnia-
     Herzegovina. Turkey is one of five non-EU countries contributing to the EULEX mission in
     Kosovo. Turkey wishes to enhance cooperation on ESDP, while stressing its discontent with
     its status within ESDP, with the stalemate over the conclusion of a bilateral security
     agreement with the EU, as well as over the administrative arrangements with the European
     Defence Agency.

     However, concerning EU-NATO relations beyond the “Berlin Plus” arrangements, Turkey
     continues to object to EU-NATO co-operation which would involve all EU Member States.


EN                                                 83                                                   EN
      This created problems for EU-NATO co-operation in the context of civilian ESDP missions,
     in particular in Kosovo and Afghanistan.

     Conclusion

     Turkey’s alignment with the EU’s common foreign and security policy continued. Turkey has
     enhanced its positive role of regional stabilisation, in particular as regards the Caucasus and
     the Middle East. Turkey supports the EU efforts to ensure stability in Iraq and has maintained
     close diplomatic relations with this country, including contacts with the Kurdish regional
     government.

     Turkey is contributing substantially to ESDP and seeking greater involvement in ESDP
     activities. However, Turkey objects to EU-NATO co-operation which would involve all EU
     Member States. Turkey has not aligned with the EU position on membership of the
     Wassenaar Arrangement.

     4.32.    Chapter 32: Financial control

     Progress has been made in the area of Public Internal Financial Control (PIFC). The
     Internal Audit Coordination Board of the Ministry of Finance has approved the Turkish public
     internal audit strategy for 2008-2010 in November 2007. In July 2008, the Ministry of
     Finance has adopted amendments to the Public Financial Management and Control Law
     (PFMCL) relating to accounting and drafted amendments to further align public internal
     control with best practices. A number of pieces of secondary legislation and tertiary
     regulations were approved in the course of 2008, inter alia the internal control standards and
     the internal audit manual. Over 500 internal auditors have been trained and certified in
     accordance with the Public Financial Management and Control (PFMC) Law, while nearly
     500 financial officers have been employed in budget spending centres. A first annual report
     on the status of PIFC (for 2007) was presented to the Court of Accounts.

     As a result of full enactment of the PFMC Law, the 2002 PIFC policy paper and the related
     action plan should be updated. The PIFC strategy will have to focus on separation of the roles
     and responsibilities of internal audit and inspection boards, including description of the
     comprehensive control environment in the public sector to clarify the delineation of control,
     audit and inspection functions, the need to harmonise internal audit of the national budget and
     of EU financial assistance, the precise definition of ex-ante financial control, establishment of
     an operational central harmonisation unit (CHU) for internal audit and of the decentralised
     internal audit units and a CHU for FMC relations with the strategy development units. The
     issue of the location of the CHU has to be decided as soon as possible to ensure that the
     modern public internal audit profession can develop under optimum and non-political
     conditions.

     The internal audit function has become operational in some government institutions following
     the appointment of internal auditors and the publication of public internal audit standards.
     Establishment of the strategy development units and their recruitment process are continuing.
     The internal audit coordination board issued key documents on internal audit. A permanent
     central harmonisation unit for internal audit should be established.

     Preparations are fairly advanced in this area.




EN                                                    84                                                 EN
      Some progress can be reported on external audit. The decision of the General Assembly of
     the Turkish Court of Accounts in July 2008 has taken important step by providing the Court
     of Accounts with the mandate to audit all but confidential expenditures of the Defence
     Industry Support Fund. The revised Law on the Turkish Court of Accounts has not yet been
     enacted, despite appearing on the government’s priority list. This delay in adoption of the
     revised law is having a serious impact, especially on the external audit of local
     administrations.

     Preparations are moderately advanced in this area.

     There has been some progress on protection of the EU’s financial interests. In August the
     Prime Ministerial Inspection Board (PMIB) was confirmed as the Anti-Fraud Cooperation
     Structure (AFCOS) contact point and as such continues to cooperate with OLAF. Its required
     operational independence for all legislative, administrative and operational aspects of
     protection of the Communities’ financial interests has yet to be developed but is envisaged by
     the end of 2008.

     There have been some developments with regard to the protection of the European
     Communities' financial interests (PIF Convention). The new Turkish penal code satisfies
     many of the requirements of the PIF Convention. However monitoring by the Turkish
     authorities of the actual application of the Convention is required.

     Preparations are moderately advanced in this area.

     Little progress can be reported on protection of the euro against counterfeiting. The 2007
     amendment to the Law on the Turkish lira envisages removal of “new” from “new Turkish
     lira” with effect from 1 January 2009. As part of the reminting exercise, Turkey is expected to
     redesign Turkish coins to eliminate any similarities with euro coins. The Turkish authorities
     have the expertise required for analysis and classification of counterfeit notes and coins. The
     administrative capacity of the four enforcement bodies is sufficient. The counterfeit
     monitoring system is in operation under the auspices of the Turkish Central Bank. There are
     institutions serving de facto as the national analysis centre, national coin analysis centre and
     national central office. These structures need to be officially appointed to ensure
     institutionalisation and sustainable cooperation with the EU institutions. The Turkish
     legislation does not envisage any sanctions against credit institutions which fail to withdraw
     counterfeits from circulation and against medals and tokens similar to euro coins.

     Preparations are moderately advanced in this area.

     Conclusion

     Moderate progress can be reported in the area of financial control. Legislation implementing
     the PFMC Law is in place, but a number of amendments relating to internal control need to be
     approved. Internal auditors have started to take up office. Institutionalisation of the newly
     established administrative structures is continuing. Further efforts are needed to ensure full
     implementation of the PFMC Law. For this purpose, Turkey will need to update its 2002
     PIFC policy paper and adopt the revised law of the Turkish Court of Accounts.

     Permanent structures are needed for cooperation with the European Anti-Fraud Office on
     protection of the EU’s financial interests and for contacts with the Commission departments
     responsible for protection of the euro against counterfeiting.



EN                                                 85                                                   EN
      Overall, Turkey’s level of alignment with the acquis in this chapter is moderately advanced.

     4.33.    Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions

     There remain no significant divergences with the EU system concerning the basic principles
     and institutions in the underlying policy areas linked to the application of the EU own
     resources system. Efforts to align with the relevant acquis chapters (customs, taxation,
     statistics and financial control) have continued. In 2008, Turkstat submitted to Eurostat GDP
     estimates compiled in accordance with the European system of accounts (ESA95) However,
     further progress is needed towards full implementation of the ESA95 standards to ensure
     appropriate measurement of the resource based on gross national income.

     Although the own resources acquis does not require transposition, it is important to establish
     coordination structures and implementing rules to ensure the correct calculation, collection,
     payment and control of own resources and reporting to the EU for implementation of the own
     resources rules. Stronger administrative capacity is also needed in the relevant policy areas, in
     particular agriculture, customs, taxation, statistics and financial control. This includes setting
     up effective instruments to combat customs duty and VAT fraud so that the financial interests
     of the EU can be protected.

     Conclusion

     The acquis in this area is directly applicable upon membership and does not require
     transposition. Sound coordination structures and implementing rules will need to be
     established in due course. Preparations in the area of financial and budgetary provisions are at
     an early stage.




EN                                                  86                                                    EN
                                                                                    STATISTICAL ANNEX
 STATISTICAL DATA (as of 29 September 2008)
 Turkey

 Basic data                                                                                  Note 1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006                      2007
 Population (thousand)                                                                        1)  64 642 65 787 66 889 67 896 68 838 69 770 70 692 71 610 72 520                           69 689b
 Total area of the country (km²)                                                              2) 783 562 783 562 783 562 783 562 783 562 783 562 783 562 783 562 783 562                   783 562

 National accounts                                                                           Note    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005     2006      2007
 Gross domestic product (GDP) (million national currency)                                           70 203 104 596 166 658 240 224 350 476 454 781 559 033 648 932 758 391    856 387
 GDP (million euro)                                                                                 242 787 233 424 289 446 219 816 243 570 269 322 314 304 387 655 419 013   480 281
 GDP (euro per capita)                                                                               3 756   3 548   4 327   3 238   3 538   3 860   4 446   5 413    5 778    6 892b
 GDP (in Purchasing Power Standards (PPS) per capita)                                               7200.0e 7 000.0 7 600.0 7 000.0 7 000.0 7 000.0 8 100.0 8 800.0 9 700.0e 10 300.0be
 SI: GDP (in PPS per capita, EU-25=100)                                                              42.7e   39.2     40.0    35.6    34.4    34.1    37.5    39.2    41.3e     41.8e
 SI: Growth rate of GDP (national currency, at constant prices, % change on previous year)             :      -3.4     6.8    -5.7     6.2     5.3     9.4     8.4     6.9       4.5
 SI: Employment growth (national accounts, % change on previous year)                                  :        :       :       :       :       :       :       :        :        :
 Labour productivity growth: GDP growth per person employed (% change on previous year)                :        :       :       :       :       :       :       :        :        :
 SI: Unit labour cost growth (national accounts, % change on previous year)                            :        :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :         :
 SI: Labour productivity (GDP in PPS per person employed, EU-25=100)                                 53.2e   49.0    53.3e   49.1e   49.1e   49.8e   54.0e   56.2e    59.9e     61.3e
 Gross value added by main sectors (%)
      Agriculture                                                                                    12.9      10.7     10.8       9.4     11.4     11.1      10.7      10.6       9.4       8.7
      Industry                                                                                       27.7      25.4     24.6      23.8     23.2     23.5      23.0      23.0      22.9      22.2
      Construction                                                                                    6.0       5.6      5.4       4.7      4.6      4.5       5.0       5.0       5.4       5.6
      Services                                                                                       53.4      58.3     59.2      62.1     60.8     60.8      61.3      61.3      62.4      63.5
 Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%)                                                76.7      80.7     82.2      80.8     80.8     83.5      83.2      83.5      82.9      83.5
      Households and NPISH, as a share of GDP (%)                                                    66.5      68.5     70.5      68.4     68.0     71.2      71.3      71.7      70.5      70.8
      General government, as a share of GDP (%)                                                      10.3      12.2     11.7      12.4     12.7     12.2      11.9      11.8      12.3      12.6
 Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%)                                                22.9      18.9     20.4      15.9     16.7     17.0      20.3      21.0      22.3      21.6
 Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%)                                                       -0.7      0.2      0.4       -0.9     0.9      0.6       -1.0      -1.0      -0.2       0.1
 Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                                                  21.3      19.4     20.1      27.4     25.2     23.0      23.6      21.9      22.7      22.0
 Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                                                  20.2      19.3     23.1      23.3     23.6     24.0      26.2      25.4      27.6      27.1

 Industry                                                                                    Note    1998     1999     2000      2001     2002     2003      2004      2005      2006       2007
 Industrial production volume index (2000=100)                                                         :        :      100.0     91.3     99.9     108.7     119.3     128.7     136.3      143.6

 Inflation rate                                                                              Note    1998     1999      2000     2001     2002      2003      2004      2005      2006      2007
 SI: Consumer price index (CPI), (total, % change on previous year)                                  84.6     64.9      54.9     54.4     45.0      25.3      10.6       8.2       9.6       8.8

 Balance of payments                                                                         Note     1998     1999      2000     2001     2002      2003      2004      2005      2006      2007
 Balance of payments: current account total (million euro)                                           1 784     -868    -10 741    4 198    -662     -6 643   -11 601   -17 794   -25 401   -27 547
 Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro)                                  -12 522   -9 168   -23 882   -3 755   -6 758   -11 925   -18 278   -26 516   -32 607   -34 079
 Balance of payments current account: exports of goods (million euro)                                27 421   27 239    33 375   38 777   43 062    46 317    55 097    62 989    74 555    84 135




EN                                                                                              87                                                                                                   EN
  Balance of payments current account: imports of goods (million euro)                                39 942     36 406    57 256    42 532    49 819    58 242    73 375     89 505    107 162   118 214
 Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro)                                    12 058      7 039    12 316    10 201     8 339     9 292    10 288     12 276    11 015    10 112
 Balance of payments current account: net income (million euro)                                      -2 663     -3 319    -4 333    -5 583    -4 816    -4 912    -4 509     -4 722     -5 329    -5 212
 Balance of payments current account: net current transfers (million euro)                            4 910      4 580     5 158     3 335     2 573      902       898       1 169      1 520    1 632
     of which government transfers (million euro)                                                      133        330       221       224       526       257       252        485        495      590
 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million euro)                               838        735      1 063     3 743     1 198     1 548     2 239      8 063    15 920    16 202

 Public finance                                                                               Note       1998    1999      2000      2001      2002      2003      2004      2005       2006      2007
 General government deficit/surplus, relative to GDP (%)                                                   :       :       -10.9     -24.5     -10.2     -9.0      -4.5      -0.6       -0.1      -1.2
 SI: General government debt, relative to GDP (%)                                                          :       :        42.9      77.6      73.7     67.3      59.2      52.3       46.1      38.8

 Financial indicators                                                                         Note    1998       1999      2000      2001      2002      2003      2004       2005       2006      2007
 Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%)                                         35.6       41.7      44.7       57.7      56.2      47.3      41.2       35.0      39.0      37.5
 Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports (%)                              200.8e     259.4e    255.1e    240.9e    243.2e    217.5e    183.8e     168.0e     174.9e       :
 Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million euro)                         3)     7 000      8 635    12 205     8 965     9 291    13 188    15 762    38 978b    38 616     44 644
 Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up to two years, million euro)               4)    31 206     41 324    51 591    37 253    36 325    47 398    59 415    150 152b   160 193   201 366
 Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments, million euro)                               5)    32 878     42 950    54 207    38 973    38 041    50 488    63 411    164 302b   171 832   215 308
 Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents (consolidated) (million euro)          30 790     30 856    44 492    26 977    20 035    29 025    43 328     83 772    100 358   140 157
 Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%)                                                  78.8       79.8      56.0      95.5      49.6      36.1      22.0       15.1      15.8      17.3
 Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%)                                               6)      79.5       86.1      51.2      78.8      53.7     42.8      29.1       23.8       19.0      20.1
 Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%)                                               7)      93.3       85.5      38.2      62.2      53.9      40.3      23.6       19.9      21.5      22.3
 euro exchange rates: average of period - 1 euro = … national currency                                0.293      0.447     0.575     1.102     1.440     1.695     1.777      1.677     1.809    1.789e
 Effective exchange rate index (2000=100)                                                            193.0e     121.4e    100.0e     46.8e     40.1e     40.4e     39.3e      43.6e     39.1e     44.5e
 Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro)                                             17 751     24 253    25 331    22 660    26 949    28 134    27 654     44 277    48 116    52 058

 External trade                                                                               Note       1998     1999     2000      2001      2002      2003      2004       2005      2006      2007
 Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro)                                                     :    -13 387   -29 263   -11 194   -16 341   -18 620   -27 637   -34 560       :         :
 Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro)                                                  :    24 964    30 182    35 062    38 137    41 516    50 891    58 849        :         :
 Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro)                                                  :    38 351    59 444    46 256    54 478    60 136    78 528    93 410        :         :
 Terms of trade (export price index / import price index, % change to previous year)           8)          :      -1.4      -8.5      -2.3      -0.6      -0.2       2.0      -2.6      -3.3       7.8
 Share of exports to EU-27 countries in value of total exports (%)                                         :      58.0      56.4      56.0      56.6      58.3      57.9      56.4        :         :
 Share of imports from EU-27 countries in value of total imports (%)                                       :      55.4      52.4      47.9      49.8      50.6      49.3      45.2        :         :
                                                                                                                 #ARG!     514.8     -73.4     -75.4     -72.7    -1431.9    -231.3     25.5     -335.1
 Demography                                                                                   Note       1998     1999     2000      2001      2002      2003      2004       2005      2006      2007
 Natural growth rate: natural change (births minus deaths) (per 1000 inhabitants)                        16.0     15.4      14.1      13.7      13.5      13.2      12.9      12.6      12.4        :
 Net migration rate: immigrants minus emigrants (per 1000 inhabitants)                                     :        :         :         :         :         :         :         :         :         :
 Infant mortality rate: deaths of children under one year of age per 1000 live births                    36.5     33.9      28.9      27.8      26.7      25.6      24.6      23.6      22.6      21.7
 Life expectancy at birth: male (years)                                                                  66.7     67.1      68.1      68.2      68.4      68.6      68.8      68.9      69.1      69.3
 Life expectancy at birth: female (years)                                                                71.3     71.8      72.8      73.0      73.2      73.4      73.6      73.8      74.0      74.2




EN                                                                                                  88                                                                                                    EN
  Labour market                                                                                     Note   1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
 Economic activity rate (15-64): share of population aged 15-64 that is economically active (%)           55.3    55.2    52.4    52.3    52.3    51.1    51.5    51.3    51.1    51.0
 SI: Employment rate (15-64): share of population aged 15-64 that is in employment (%)                    51.4    50.8    48.9    47.8    46.7    45.5    46.1    45.9    45.9    45.8
      Share of male population aged 15-64 that is in employment (%)                                       74.3    72.7    71.7    69.3    66.9    65.9    67.9    68.2    68.0    67.9
      Share of female population aged 15-64 that is in employment (%)                                     28.5    28.9    26.2    26.3    26.6    25.2    24.3    23.7    23.8    23.8
 SI: Employment rate of older workers (55-64): share of population aged 55-64 that is in
                                                                                                          41.1    39.3    36.4    35.9    35.3    32.7    33.1    30.8    30.1    29.4
 employment (%)
 Employment by main sectors (%)
      Agriculture                                                                                         41.5    40.2    36.0    37.6    34.9    33.9    34.0    29.5    27.3    26.4
      Industry                                                                                            17.1    17.2    17.7    17.5    18.5    18.2    18.3    19.4    19.7    19.8
      Construction                                                                                         6.1     6.2     6.3     5.2     4.5     4.6     4.7     5.3     5.7     5.8
      Services                                                                                            35.3    36.5    40.0    39.7    42.1    43.4    43.0    45.8    47.3    48.0
 SI: Unemployment rate: share of labour force that is unemployed (%)                                      6.9     7.7     6.5     8.4     10.3    10.5    10.3    10.3    9.9     9.9
      Share of male labour force that is unemployed (%)                                                   6.9     7.7     6.6     8.7     10.7    10.7    10.5    10.3    9.7     9.8
      Share of female labour force that is unemployed (%)                                                  6.8     7.6     6.3     7.5     9.4    10.1     9.7    10.3    10.3    10.3
 Unemployment rate of persons < 25 years: share of labour force aged <25 that is unemployed
                                                                                                          14.2    15.0    13.1    16.2    19.2    20.5    19.7    19.3    18.7    19.6
 (%)
 SI: Long-term unemployment rate: share of labour force that is long-term unemployed (%)                   2.7     2.1     1.3     1.7     2.9     2.5     4.0     4.1     3.5     3.0

 Social cohesion                                                                                   Note   1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
 Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency)                                             :       :       :       :     372.1   492.0   529.4   595.4     :       :
 Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and salaries divided by the CPI)
                                                                                                            :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :
 (2000=100)
 SI: Early school-leavers: share of population aged 18-24 having not completed upper
                                                                                                            :       :     58.8    57.3    54.8    53.0    54.6    51.3    50.0    47.8
 secondary education and not currently in education or training (%)

 Standard of living                                                                                Note   1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
 Number of passenger cars per 1000 population                                                       9)    59.4     61.9    66.1    66.8    66.8    67.4   76.4b    80.6   84.7    91.7
 Number of subscriptions to cellular mobile telephone services per 1000 population                        54.3    116.8   225.2   269.5   338.8   399.7   491.0   609.0   726.2   878.0

 Infrastructure                                                                                    Note   1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
 Density of railway network (lines in operation, per 1000 km²)                                            11.0    11.1    11.1    11.1    11.0    11.1    11.1    11.1    11.1    11.1
 Length of motorways (thousand km)                                                                         1.7     1.7     1.8     1.9     1.9     1.9     1.9     1.8     2.0     2.0

 Innovation and research                                                                           Note   1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
 SI: Spending on human resources (public expenditure on education) relative to GDP (%)                     3.3     3.1     3.5     3.7     3.6     3.7     4.1      :       :       :
 SI: Gross domestic expenditure on research & development, relative to GDP (%)                             0.5     0.6     0.6     0.7     0.7     0.6     0.7     0.8     0.8      :
 SI: Percentage of households who have Internet access at home (%)                                          :       :       :       :       :       :      7.0     8.0      :     18.9

 Environment                                                                                       Note   1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
 SI: Total greenhouse gases emissions, CO2 equivalent (tons, 1990=100)                                    151.0   151.0   165.0   154.0   159.0   168.0   174.0   184.0   195.0     :
 SI: Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1000 euro GDP 2004)                        273.6   278.2   283.8   277.6   275.9   275.7   260.2   249.7   273.3   277.7
 SI: Share of renewable energy in electricity consumption (%)                                              37.3    29.5    24.3    19.1    25.6    25.2    30.9    24.7   25.5    18.9
 SI: Road freight transport as a share of total inland freight transport (modal split of freight
                                                                                                          94.8    94.8    94.3    95.3    95.5    94.6    94.4    94.4e   94.3      :
 transport) (%)




EN                                                                                                   89                                                                                   EN
   Energy                                                                                               Note      1998     1999       2000      2001       2002      2003       2004      2005      2006         2007
  Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE)                                                      29 108   27 526     26 715    25 065     24 627    23 857     24 193    23 612    26 580      25 957p
       Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE)                                                            3 219    2 937      2 746     2 508      2 414     2 349      2 245     2 259     2 284       1 975p
       Primary production of hard coal and lignite (thousand TOE)                                               13 943   13 282     13 293    12 876     11 826    11 010     10 599    10 484    13 087      13 709p
       Primary production of natural gas (thousand TOE)                                                           465      602        526       257        311       461        566       738       839         774p
  Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE)                                                             43 410   43 347     50 873    46 070     51 002    56 655     58 574    61 986    73 256      79 834p
  Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE)                                                                72 312   71 042     77 374    71 370     75 341    79 278     81 859    85 159    99 642     105 792p
  Electricity generation (thousand GWh)                                                                          111.0    116.4      124.9     122.7      129.4     140.6      150.7     162.0     176.3      191.1p

   Agriculture                                                                                           Note   1998      1999     2000       2001       2002        2003     2004       2005     2006         2007
   Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (producer prices, previous
                                                                                                                110.6     94.7     104.2      93.3       108.5       98.0     101.6      106.9       :            :
   year=100)
   Total utilised agricultural area (thousand hectare)                                                         39 344 39 180 38 757 40 967 41 196 40 645 41 210 41 223 40 496                                39 503p
   Livestock: cattle (thousand heads, end of period)                                                     10)   11 031 11 054 10 761 10 548               9 803      9 788    10 069 10 526 10 871             11 037
   Livestock: pigs (thousand heads, end of period)                                                                5        3         3          3          4           7        4          2         1            2
   Livestock: sheep and goats (thousand heads, end of period)                                                  37 492 38 030 35 693 33 994 31 954 32 203 31 811 31 822 32 260                                 31 749
   Production and utilisation of milk on the farm (total whole milk, thousand tonnes)                             :         :         :          :          :          :        :           :        :            :
   Crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand tonnes, harvested production)                           33 060 28 749 32 108 29 426 30 686 30 658 33 957 36 231 34 365                                 29 645
   Crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes, harvested production)                                         22 283 17 102 18 821 12 633 16 523 12 623 13 517 15 181 14 452                                 12 415
   Crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes, harvested production)                                         21 151 22 083 22 357 21 930 23 698 24 018 23 215 24 320 24 017                                 25 670
 SI: Structural Indicator
 e: estimate
 f: forecast
 p: provisional
 b: break in serie
 1.             Source: Eurostat. Break in serie in 2006.
 2.             Including lakes.
 3.             Before December 2005, M1 included currency in circulation and demand desposits (TRY). From December 2005 onwards, M1 includes currency in circulation and demand deposits (TRY, FX).
 4.             Before December 2005, M2 included M1 and time deposits (TRY). From December 2005 onwards, M2 includes M1 and time deposits (TRY, FX).
 5.             Before December 2005, M3 included M2 and official deposits (time/demand). From December 2005 onwards, M3 includes M2, fund received from repo transactions and money market funds (B type liquid funds).
 6.             Averages of monthly data for lending to enterprises of more than one year.
 7.             Averages of monthly data, up to one year or longer.
 8.             Calculated on the basis of ISIC Rev.3, base year 2003
 9.             From 2004 onwards, data source is the General Directorate of Public Security.
 10.            Excluding the number of buffaloes.




EN                                                                                                         90                                                                                                           EN

