                          EUROPEAN
                          COMMISSION




                                                 Brussels, 29.5.2019
                                                 SWD(2019) 220 final




                    COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

                                  Turkey 2019 Report

                              Accompanying the document

     Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
       European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions

                     2019 Communication on EU Enlargement Policy

                                 {COM(2019) 260 final}




EN                                                                                    EN
                                     Table of Contents
1.       INTRODUCTION                                                                     3
1.1.     Context                                                                          3
1.2      Summary of the report                                                            3
2.       FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: POLITICAL CRITERIA AND RULE OF LAW
         CHAPTERS                                                                         9
2.1.     Functioning of democratic institutions and public administration reform          10
2.1.1.   Democracy                                                                        10
2.1.2.   Public administration reform                                                     19
2.2.     Rule of law and fundamental rights                                               21
2.2.1.   Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights                                     21
2.2.2.   Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security                                        40
3.       FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
         COMPETITIVENESS                                                                  51
3.1.     The existence of a functioning market economy                                    52
3.2.     The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 57
4.       GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION                              60
5.       ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP                                  62
5.1.     Chapter 1: Free movement of goods                                                62
5.2.     Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers                                       64
5.3.     Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services                64
5.4.     Chapter 4: Free movement of capital                                              65
5.5.     Chapter 5: Public procurement                                                    66
5.6.     Chapter 6: Company law                                                           68
5.7.     Chapter 7: Intellectual property law                                             69
5.8.     Chapter 8: Competition policy                                                    70
5.9.     Chapter 9: Financial services                                                    71
5.10.    Chapter 10: Information society and media                                        72
5.11.    Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development                                    74
5.12.    Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy                     75
5.13.    Chapter 13: Fisheries                                                            76
5.14.    Chapter 14: Transport policy                                                     77
5.15.    Chapter 15: Energy                                                               78
5.16.    Chapter 16: Taxation                                                             81
5.17.    Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy                                         82
5.18.    Chapter 18: Statistics                                                           83

                                                1
 5.19.   Chapter 19: Social policy and employment                                     84
5.20.   Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy                                 87
5.21.   Chapter 21: Trans-European networks                                          88
5.22.   Chapter 22: Regional policy and the coordination of structural instruments   89
5.25    Chapter 25: Science and research                                             90
5.26    Chapter 26: Education and culture                                            91
5.27    Chapter 27: Environment and climate change                                   93
5.28    Chapter 28: Health and consumer protection                                   94
5.29.   Chapter 29: Customs union                                                    97
5.30.   Chapter 30: External relations                                               97
5.31.   Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy                             98
5.32.   Chapter 32: Financial control                                                101
5.33.   Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions                               104
ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND TURKEY                                        105
ANNEX II – STATISTICAL ANNEX                                                         107




                                             2
 1.       INTRODUCTION
1.1.     Context
Turkey remains a key partner for the European Union. Turkey has been linked to the EU by
an Association Agreement since 1964 and a Customs Union was established in 1995. The
European Council granted the status of candidate country to Turkey in December 1999 and
accession negotiations were opened in October 2005. Within the framework of accession
negotiations, 16 chapters have been opened so far and one of these was provisionally closed.
The General Affairs Council conclusions of June 2018 stated that under the currently
prevailing circumstances, Turkey’s accession negotiations have effectively come to a
standstill, no further chapters can be considered for opening or closing and no further work
towards the modernisation of the Customs Union can be currently foreseen 1. The Turkish
government’s repeated commitment to the objective of EU accession has not been matched
by corresponding measures and reforms since then, and the EU’s serious concerns on
continued negative developments in rule of law, fundamental rights and the Judiciary have
not been addressed. The EU-Turkey Association Council held its 54th meeting on 15 March
2019 in Brussels. After a hiatus of three years, the inter-ministerial Reform Action Group
resumed its work, holding meetings in August and December 2018, as well as on 9 May
2019.
The EU and Turkey continued their dialogue and cooperation in the areas of joint interest
including a leaders' meeting between Presidents Juncker and Tusk and President Erdoğan in
Bulgaria in March 2018 and a High Level Political Dialogue in November 2018. Dialogue
was pursued on foreign and security policy, notably on Syria, Libya and Iraq and, following a
counter-terrorism dialogue in November 2017, there is slow movement towards concrete
implementation of jointly agreed actions. Turkey and the EU further developed their
cooperation in the areas of energy, transport, economy and trade. There was a High Level
Transport Dialogue in January 2019 and a High Level Economic Dialogue in February 2019.
Technical discussions started for the mutual recognition of a few Geographical Indications of
agricultural products. The March 2016 EU-Turkey Statement continues to deliver results,
with both parties committed to its effective implementation. Turkey sustained its outstanding
efforts to host more than 3.6 million registered refugees from Syria and around registered
370,000 refugees from other countries, which is the largest refugee community in the world.
Turkey and the EU further built on the fruitful cooperation under the Facility for Refugees in
Turkey. By May 2019, out of EUR 6 billion mobilised by the EU, more than 80 projects had
been launched and more than EUR 2.2 billion has been disbursed.
1.2      Summary of the report2
The state of emergency introduced on 15 July 2016 in the aftermath of the attempted coup
ended on 18 July 2018, when its last extension expired, but was immediately followed by the
adoption by the Turkish parliament of a law that retained many elements of the emergency
rule for further three years. The law limits certain fundamental freedoms, allowing in
particular to dismiss public servants (including judges) and to prolong detentions, to restrict
freedom of movement and public assembly, and extending powers for Government-appointed
provincial governors.



1
 The European Council conclusions of December 2006 remain in force.
2
  This report covers the period from 1 March 2018 to 1 March 2019. It is based on input from a variety of
sources, including contributions from the government of Turkey, the EU Member States, European Parliament
reports and information from various international and non-governmental organisations.

                                                   3
 The EU, which immediately and strongly condemned the attempted coup, reiterated its full
support for the country’s democratic institutions and recognised Turkey’s legitimate need to
take swift and proportionate action in the face of such a serious threat. However, the broad
scale and collective nature of measures taken since the attempted coup under the state of
emergency, such as widespread dismissals, arrests and detentions, continued to raise very
serious concerns.
During the state of emergency, 36 decrees were issued constraining certain civil and political
rights, as well as defence rights, expanding police powers and those of prosecutors for
investigations and prosecutions as well as foreseeing the dismissal of more than 152 000 civil
servants, including academics, teachers and public officials.
The Constitutional Court has ruled that it does not have a mandate to review the legality of
decrees using legal powers issued during the state of emergency. Parliament has reviewed 32
of them. In May 2017, the Turkish authorities established an Inquiry Commission on the
State of Emergency Measures tasked to review all complaints individually.
As of May 2019, 126 600 applications had been made. Of these, the Inquiry Commission has
reviewed 70 406 and only 5 250 have led to a reinstatement, while 65 156 complaints have
been rejected. There are 55 714 applications pending. The rate of processing of applications
raises concerns at whether each case is being examined individually. Since there are no
hearings, there is a general lack of procedural guarantees for applicants and decisions are
taken on the basis of the written files related to the original dismissal, all of which calls into
question the extent to which the Inquiry Commission is an effective judicial remedy.
With the ending of the state of emergency, Turkey has withdrawn its derogations from the
European Convention on Human Rights and from the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR). However, the full monitoring procedure that the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe reopened in April 2017 remains in place.
Beyond the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures, the capacity of Turkey
to ensure an effective domestic legal remedy in the sense of the European Court of Human
Rights has been further undermined. Several court rulings favourable to prominent
defendants, including human rights defenders, were swiftly reversed by another or even by
the same court, in some instances following comments from the executive.
Many human rights defenders, civil society activists, media, academics, politicians, doctors,
lawyers, judges and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people, are still
detained – sometimes without indictment, and are facing smear campaigns by the media and
senior politicians. The space for civil society organisations working on fundamental rights
and freedoms has further shrunk, notably exemplified by the introduction of further
administrative obstacles. The rights-based organisations closed down under the state of
emergency have not been offered any legal remedy in respect to confiscations. Since October
2018, following the amendment of the Parliament's rules of procedure, civil society
organisations are excluded from the legislative consultation process at parliamentary
committees. Inclusive mechanisms for consulting across society as widely as possible are not
present.
Key recommendations of the Council of Europe and its bodies are yet to be addressed by
Turkey. Allegations of wrongdoing need to be established by transparent procedures and on
an individual basis. Individual criminal liability can only be established with full respect for
the separation of powers, the full independence of the judiciary and the right of every
individual to a fair trial.


                                                4
 The new presidential system has centralised power in the hands of the executive and
significantly curtailed Parliament's legislative and oversight functions. Since July 2018,
Parliament has adopted 17 pieces of legislation, including controversial changes to its rules of
procedure. Ministers no longer appear before Members of Parliament, who can ask only
written questions.
Growing political polarisation, especially in the run-up to the March 2019 municipal
elections continues to prevent constructive parliamentary dialogue. The marginalisation of
the opposition, notably the People's Democratic Party (HDP) continues, and many HDP
lawmakers are detained. The long-standing shortcomings of the system of parliamentary
immunity have not been addressed.
The June 2018 presidential and parliamentary elections and the March 2019 municipal
elections were marked by strong turnouts. Voters had a genuine choice despite the lack of
conditions for contestants to compete on an equal basis. The ruling party enjoyed a notable
advantage, also reflected in excessive coverage by government-affiliated public and private
media. After the municipal elections, the Supreme Election Council declared four elected
mayors and members of municipal councils ineligible to assume office in the south-east of
Turkey, even though their candidacies had been validated before the elections. It also
annulled the metropolitan mayoral elections in Istanbul and scheduled a re-run for 23 June.
The decisions by the Supreme Election Council to re-run elections in Istanbul as well as to
grant the mayorship of individual municipalities in the south-east to second-placed candidates
are a source of serious concern regarding the respect of the legality and integrity of the
electoral process and the institution’s independence from political pressure. They go against
the core aim of a democratic electoral process – that is to ensure that the will of the people
prevails. The annulment of the metropolitan mayoral election in Istanbul and its re-
scheduling were strongly contested by opposition parties.
The full entry into force of the presidential system has remodelled the executive and state
administration. The presidential system, including the abolition of the position of Prime
Minister and other functions such as Under Secretaries in Ministries has led to greater
politicisation of the public administration. The President now has the power to nominate the
heads of the vast majority of public regulatory authorities.
Before the March 2019 municipal elections, continuing arrests and dismissals of local
politicians and appointment of trustees as well as the arbitrary nature of these appointments
deprived voters of political representation at local level, and seriously risked damaging local
democracy.
The government has overhauled the legal framework governing the civil-military relations
and increased the powers of the executive over the military significantly, thereby
strengthening civilian oversight. As part of the constitutional amendments, high military
courts were effectively abolished, but the military and intelligence services continue to lack
sufficient accountability to Parliament and security personnel continue to have wide-ranging
legal protection. The parliamentary law enforcement oversight commission remained
ineffective. The legal framework for overseeing military expenditure has not yet been
improved.
The situation in the south-east has continued to be challenging, despite an improved security
environment. The Government continued security operations against a background of the
recurrent violent acts by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which remains on the EU list
of persons, groups and entities involved in acts of terrorism. While the Government has a
legitimate right to fight terrorism, it is also responsible for ensuring this is done in accordance


                                                5
 with the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms. Anti-terror measures need to
be proportionate. Despite some reconstruction, only few internally displaced persons have
received compensation. There were no visible developments on the resumption of a credible
political process to achieve a peaceful and sustainable solution.
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of public administration reform, and there has
been serious backsliding in the area of public service and human resources management,
which has also affected policy developments and accountability. Changes to the civil service
system have further increased the politicisation of the administration. Merit-based,
competitive appointments for senior managerial positions remain the exception. Serious
procedural shortcomings call into question the extent to which the Inquiry Commission on
the State of Emergency Measures can be considered an effective remedy for dismissed public
officials.
Turkey’s judicial system is at an early stage of preparation. There has been further serious
backsliding and the recommendations in the previous reports were not accepted or
implemented. Political pressure on judges and prosecutors and transfers of a large number of
judges and prosecutors against their will continued. This continues to have a negative impact
on the independence and overall quality and efficiency of the judiciary. The large scale
recruitments of new judges and prosecutors under the current system are concerning because
no measures were taken to address the lack of objective, merit-based, uniform and
pre-established criteria for their recruitment and promotion. The Justice Academy of Turkey
was re-established by Presidential Decree, after it had previously been closed under the state
of emergency. The chilling effect of the dismissal and forced transfers of judges and
prosecutors is still observed, and risk engendering widespread self-censorship. No measures
were taken to restore legal guarantees to ensure the independence of the judiciary from the
executive or to strengthen the independence of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors (CJP).
A judicial reform strategy for 2019-2023 was announced in August 2018 but has not yet been
adopted. Turkey consulted the Council of Europe and the Commission on the draft strategy.
The country is at an early stage in the fight against corruption. There was backsliding since
dismantled preventive bodies have not been replaced by an independent body, in line with the
United Nations Convention against Corruption to which Turkey is a party. Both the legal and
institutional frameworks continued to allow undue influence from the executive in the
investigation and prosecution of high-profile corruption cases. The legislative amendments
envisaged in previous anti-corruption strategies have not been implemented. Public
procurement legislation remained incompatible with the EU acquis and the scope of the
derogations to the public procurement law was increased further. The absence of a robust
anti-corruption strategy and action plan is a sign of lack of political will to fight decisively
against corruption. No permanent, functionally independent anti-corruption body exists and
there is no specialised prosecution service to lead anti-corruption investigations and only few
specialised courts. Overall, corruption is widespread and remains an issue of concern.
Turkey has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime but progress is
limited overall. The country needs to improve its legislation on cybercrime, assets
confiscation and witness protections. Turkish data protection is still not in line with European
standards and will have to be revised in order to ensure the implementation of the operational
agreement with Europol currently being negotiated. Turkey should develop and implement a
more comprehensive and coherent legal framework for the confiscation of the proceeds of
crime and improve its capacity to manage frozen assets.
Turkey made good progress in the area of migration and asylum policy and remained
committed to the effective implementation of the March 2016 EU-Turkey statement. The

                                               6
 declining trend in irregular crossings from Turkey to the Aegean islands since the entry into
force of the Statement was supported by intensified efforts by Turkey's law enforcement
agencies. Turkey sustained its outstanding efforts to provide massive and unprecedented
humanitarian aid and support to more than 3.6 million registered refugees from Syria and
around 370 000 registered refugees from other countries, thus hosting the largest refugee
community in the world. Turkey has set up seven working groups to carry out technical work
on the outstanding benchmarks of the visa liberalisation dialogue. However, no progress has
been made in the harmonisation of the Turkish visa policy with the EU common visa policy.
Serious backsliding remains in terms of human and fundamental rights. While the legal
framework includes general guarantees of respect for human and fundamental rights, it still
needs to be brought in line with the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and the
case law of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR). There has been serious
backsliding in the areas of freedom of expression, assembly, and association and in
procedural and property rights. No changes were made to the legislation introduced
immediately after the lifting of the state of emergency, which removed crucial safeguards
protecting civil society activists, human rights defenders, journalists, academics and others
from abuses. The enforcement of rights is hindered by the fragmentation and limited
independence of public institutions responsible for protecting those rights and freedoms as
well as by the lack of an independent judiciary. Trade union rights continue to be under
severe pressure. No steps were taken to investigate, prosecute or punish those involved in
profound human rights violations during the state of emergency. There was a climate of
intimidation across society as the state of emergency was used to narrow the space for
dissenting or alternative views. As of December 2018, the total number of people in prison
without indictment or pending trial is 57 000, more than 20% of the prison population. There
is overcrowding and conditions are deteriorating. Severe restrictions on freedom of
expression continued and the trend for prosecution of writers, social media users and other
members of the public, even children, for insulting the President has dramatically increased.
The lack of transparency as to media ownership continues to cast doubt on the independence
of editorial comment. Roma3 continue to live in very poor housing, often lacking basic public
services and relying on social benefits. The urban renewal projects continue to affect
primarily their settlements, forcing the displacement of entire families. The rights of the most
vulnerable groups and of persons belonging to minorities need better protection. Gender-
based violence, discrimination, hate speech against minorities, hate crime and violations of
human rights of LGBTI persons are still a matter of serious concern.
Turkey welcomed the UN’s renewed efforts to consult stakeholders as to a possible
resumption of negotiations regarding Cyprus. Tensions in the region around the prospect of
hydrocarbon exploration off the coast of Cyprus increased, due to Turkey’s actions and
statements challenging the right of the Republic of Cyprus to exploit hydrocarbon resources
in the Cyprus Exclusive Economic Zone. In May 2019, Turkey sent a drilling platform
accompanied by military vessels to the Republic of Cyprus’ Exclusive Economic Zone,
escalating tensions further. The Commission recalls the European Council statement of
March 2018 strongly condemning Turkey's continued illegal actions in the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Aegean Sea. It also recalled Turkey's obligation to respect
international law and good neighbourly relations and called on Turkey to respect the
sovereign rights of Cyprus to explore and exploit its natural resources in accordance with EU
and International Law. In March 2019, the EU called on Turkey to refrain from any such
illegal acts, to which it would respond appropriately and in full solidarity with Cyprus.
3
 In line with the terminology of European institutions, the umbrella term ‘Roma’ is used here to refer to a
number of different groups, without denying the specificities of these groups.

                                                    7
 The EU has repeatedly stressed the sovereign rights of EU Member States, which include
entering into bilateral agreements and exploring and exploiting their natural resources in
accordance with the EU acquis and international law, including the UN Convention on the
Law of the Sea. Turkey has still not fulfilled its obligation to ensure full and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Additional Protocol to the EU-Turkey Association
Agreement and has not removed all the obstacles to the free movement of goods, including
restrictions on direct transport links with Cyprus. There was no progress on normalising
bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus.
Operational cooperation with Greece on migration further continued. However, tensions in
the Aegean Sea and Eastern Mediterranean were not conducive to good neighbourly relations
and undermined regional stability and security. Bilateral relations with several individual EU
Member States in particular with Austria, Germany and the Netherlands improved. The
Netherlands and Turkey normalised relations. There were repeated and increased violations
of the territorial waters and airspaces of Greece and Cyprus by Turkey. Another source of
serious concern was the six-month detention of two Greek soldiers who had been patrolling
the land border but relations improved significantly on their release in August 2018 and
following the Greek Prime Minister’s visit to Turkey in February.
In this context, the EU has expressed once again serious concern and urged Turkey to avoid
any kind of threat or action directed against a Member State, or any source of friction or
actions that would damage good neighbourly relations and the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Regarding the economic criteria, serious backsliding continued in the Turkish economy,
leading to deeper concerns over the functioning of the country’s market economy. In 2018, a
sharp deterioration in the external financing conditions exposed vulnerabilities built up over
years. In response, the Turkish authorities took a range of policy actions that have negatively
influenced the functioning of markets, more importantly, by interfering with price formation
and introducing constraints on the free use of foreign exchange. Concerns regarding the
independence of key economic institutions have deepened. The current account deficit
reached a peak in the first half of 2018 before a strong correction set in as a result of the
weakening economy and the fall in the lira. The inflation rate jumped far above the upper
band of the target range following the currency crisis and years of high credit growth, high
money growth and low real interest rates. There was no progress in improving the
transparency of state aid.
Turkey has made some progress and has a good level of preparation to cope with competitive
pressures and market forces within the EU. Turkey is well-integrated with the EU market in
terms of both trade and investment. Improvements were made in the energy sector, as well as
some advances in spending on research and development, education and physical capital.
However, there are persistent problems with the quality of education and gender equality.
Regarding its ability to assume the obligations of membership, Turkey has continued to
align with the acquis, albeit at a limited pace. There have been more instances of backsliding
regarding a number of key aspects in the areas of free movement of capital, public
procurement, competition, information society, economic and monetary policy, and external
relations. Turkey is well advanced in the areas of company law, trans-European networks and
science and research and it has achieved a good level of preparation in the areas of free
movement of goods, intellectual property law, financial services, enterprise and industrial
policy, consumer and health protection, customs union and financial control. Turkey is
moderately prepared on public procurement as important gaps remain in its alignment.
Turkey is also moderately prepared in the area of free movement of capital, statistics, energy,

                                              8
 taxation, economic and monetary union, regional policy, education and culture, CFSP and
transport policy where further significant efforts are needed across the board. Turkey has
reached some level of preparation on competition, agriculture, food safety, veterinary and
phytosanitary policy, social policy and employment, environment and climate change where
more ambitious and better coordinated policies still need to be established and implemented.
In all areas, more attention needs to be given to enforce legislation whilst many areas require
further significant progress to achieve legislative alignment with the EU acquis, strengthen
the independence of regulatory authorities and build the administrative capacities.

2.      FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: POLITICAL CRITERIA AND RULE OF LAW
        CHAPTERS
Measures under the state of emergency and follow-up
The EU, which immediately and strongly condemned the attempted coup, reiterated its full
support for the country’s democratic institutions and recognised Turkey’s legitimate need to
take swift and proportionate action in the face of such a serious threat. The state of
emergency, introduced on 15 July 2016 in the aftermath of the attempted coup, ended on 19
July 2018 when its last extension expired. Its primary objective had been to dismantle the
Gülen movement that the Turkish authorities designated a terrorist organisation in May
2016 and held responsible for the 15 July 2016 coup attempt. More generally, it was
designed to support the fight against terrorism, but the extraordinary powers it sanctioned
were disproportionately applied. Some decrees issued under the state of emergency
amended key pieces of legislation, particularly in relation to property rights, local authorities
and public administration, and audiovisual policy.
During the state of emergency, 36 decrees were issued constraining certain civil and
political rights. The decrees expanded the powers of the police and investigating prosecutors
and sanctioned large-scale dismissals of public officials and closures of entities and the
liquidation of their assets by the state. To date, Parliament has reviewed 32 of the decrees.
The Constitutional Court has ruled that it does not have a mandate to review the legality of
decrees using legal powers issued during the state of emergency. More than 152 000 civil
servants, including academics, teachers, police officers, health workers, judges and
prosecutors, have been dismissed using emergency decrees. More than 150 000 people were
taken into custody during the state of emergency and more than 78 000 were arrested on
terrorism-related charges, 50 000 of whom are still in jail. The decisions of the Inquiry
Commission on the State of Emergency Measures, established in May 2017 to individually
review all complaints, are open to judicial review before a designated administrative court in
Ankara, and then before the Constitutional Court. The majority of the Inquiry Commission’s
board members are appointed by the President of the Republic. Some 220 staff, including
judges, prosecutors, inspectors, experts and civil servants, have been seconded to the Inquiry
Commission, whose tenure was extended by a presidential decree for another year on 23
January 2019. In August 2017, the Constitutional Court ruled that some 70 000 of the
individual applications it had received were inadmissible since they had not exhausted all
earlier domestic remedies, directing applicants to the Inquiry Commission and/or to
administrative courts. The European Court of Human Rights also re-directed some 28 000
applications it had received to the Inquiry Commission. The Inquiry Commission started
considering applications in December 2017. There are questions as to how thoroughly
individual evidence is being considered. Since there are no hearings, there is a general lack
of procedural guarantees for applicants, and decisions are taken on the basis of the written
files related to the original dismissal. There are also concerns around the establishment of


                                               9
 clear criteria for the prioritisation of cases, the possibility for applicants to seek interim
measures, and whether those who are reinstated can seek additional redress before ordinary
courts. It is important that applicants who challenge a decision of the Inquiry Commission
before the administrative courts have access to their own files. Similarly, it is important that
the Inquiry Commission’s decisions are properly reasoned, and that the complainants have
access to that reasoning and may contest it in court. Applicants to the Inquiry Commission
complain that finding legal representation is often difficult.
As of May 2019, a total of 126 000 applications relating to dismissal from public service
had been made to the Inquiry Commission. Of these, the Inquiry Commission has reviewed
70 406 and only 5 250 have led to reinstatement, while 65 156 complaints have been
rejected. There are 55 714 applications pending. The rate of processing of applications raises
concerns at whether each case is being examined individually.
Immediately following the expiry of the state of emergency, the Turkish Parliament adopted
a law that retained many elements of emergency rule for a further three years, curtailing
certain fundamental freedoms, notably allowing the dismissal of public servants (including
judges) and the extension of detention periods, restricting freedom of movement and public
assembly, and extending powers for government-appointed provincial governors.
With the ending of the state of emergency, Turkey has withdrawn its derogations from the
European Convention on Human Rights. However, the full monitoring procedure that the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe reopened in April 2017 remains in place
until its serious concerns about the respect for human rights, democracy and rule of law
have been addressed. This entails regular visits by rapporteurs to hold dialogues with the
authorities, and plenary debates to review progress.
After a hiatus of three years, the inter-ministerial Reform Action Group resumed its work,
holding meetings in August and December 2018, as well as on 9 May 2019.
2.1.     Functioning of democratic institutions and public administration reform
2.1.1.   Democracy
Despite the welcome lifting of the state of emergency, Turkey has introduced many of its
more restrictive elements into legislation. The new presidential system has removed many of
the checks and balances that existed previously, and has weakened the role of Parliament. It
has led to more politicisation of the public administration and the judiciary and given the
president the power to nominate the heads of the vast majority of the public regulatory
authorities. The continuous deterioration in the situation relating to human rights, rule of law
or independence of the judiciary continued during the reporting period.
Elections
Turkey held early presidential and parliamentary elections on 24 June 2018 under state of
emergency conditions. Amendments to the electoral Law, which substantially changed the
rules for the elections and campaign process, were adopted by Parliament only one month
prior to calling the early elections. Turkey also held local elections on 31 March 2019.
While both polls enjoyed high turnouts, international observers stressed on these two
occasions that even though voters had genuine choice, candidates did not compete on an
equal basis, notably in terms of the absence of equal access to the media for all parties
running in elections, something which was reflected in excessive coverage by government-
affiliated public and private media. The decisions by the Supreme Election Council (YSK)
to re-run the metropolitan mayoral election in Istanbul as well as to grant the mayorship of
individual municipalities in the south-east to second-placed candidates are a source of

                                              10
 serious concern regarding the respect of the legality and integrity of the electoral process, as
well as about the institution’s independence from political pressure.
One of the new amendments to the electoral law allowed political parties to form electoral
alliances, giving rise to the People’s Alliance comprised of the Justice and Development
Party (AKP) and Nationalist Action Party (MHP), and the Nation’s Alliance, which united
the Republican People’s Party (CHP), Good Party (İYİ) and Felicity Party. Three other
parties contested the election: the Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP), Free Cause Party and
Vatan Party, and there were six presidential candidates.
The Election Observation Mission conducted by the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR) of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) concluded that the elections offered voters a genuine choice. However, the parties
could not compete on an equal basis due to the restrictive legal framework and powers
granted under the state of emergency, and limited freedom of assembly and expression. The
incumbent president and his party enjoyed a notable advantage, which was also reflected in
excessive coverage by public and private media close to the government. Turkey has not
formally invited the ODHIR to present its findings since 2014.
On a turnout of 86.22%, President Erdoğan won the presidential race in the first round,
securing 52.5% of the vote. In the parliamentary elections, none of the parties secured an
overall majority, although all major political parties won seats. Women remain
underrepresented in political life. Overall, 20.5% of party-nominated parliamentary
candidates were female, but since few were placed in eligible positions on the party lists
only 17.3% of Members of Parliament are women. This is nevertheless an improvement on
the 14.7% in the outgoing legislature.
The June elections marked the full entry into force of the presidential system that was
agreed by a narrow majority in a referendum in April 2017 (for details on constitutional
changes, see Governance section).
Both electoral alliances were maintained for the local elections held on 31 March 2019. The
HDP presented candidates in the south-east, while not fielding any candidate in the large
cities including Istanbul and Ankara. Turnout remained high at 84%. Overall, the People’s
Alliance secured 51.67% of the votes, while the Nation’s Alliance got 37.53% of votes. The
number of women among the candidates fielded by most political parties was very low.
The Nation’s Alliance’s candidates won in the three largest provinces as well as in other key
municipalities including Ankara, Adana, Antalya, Mersin and Hatay. According to the final
count, it also won in Istanbul where the CHP elected mayor eventually received his election
certificate after several appeals for recount of the votes in some districts were accepted. After
a long appeal process, the YSK eventually annulled the metropolitan mayoral elections in
Istanbul and scheduled a re-run for 23 June, based on alleged irregularities in the composition
of the ballot box committees. It also annulled the mandate of the CHP mayor-elect, who was
replaced by a trustee, appointed by the government. The YSK did not annul the other
elections such as the elections for district mayors, council members and mukhtars while the
same contested ballot box committees were in charge of these elections as well. Opposition
parties strongly protested against it.
The YSK rejected the HDP's extraordinary appeals in relation to the YSK’s decision not to
confirm four HDP elected-mayors and several members of municipal councils in the south-
east. Even though their candidacies had been initially validated by the YSK, they have been
denied the right to take up office on the ground that they had been previously dismissed from
public service with decree-laws under the state of emergency. At the same time, the YSK

                                               11
 gave the mayoral mandates to the candidates who got the second highest number of votes, all
from the ruling AKP, thereby in effect reversing the result of the election in these
constituencies. This is a source of serious concern regarding the respect of the legality and
integrity of the electoral process, as well as about the institution’s independence from
political pressure.
A delegation from the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe,
comprising 22 observers, carried out an election observation mission to Turkey from 27
March to 1 April 2019 to assess the local elections. In its preliminary conclusions, the
delegation noted that the elections were conducted in an orderly way. However, it also
stressed that while voters had a broad choice of political parties, it was not fully convinced
that Turkey currently has the free and fair electoral environment which is necessary for
genuinely democratic elections in line with European values and principles. The
Commission stressed that it expected the Turkish authorities to invite the Council of Europe
to observe the re-run elections in Istanbul.
Parliament
The new presidential system has significantly curtailed Parliament’s legislative and
oversight functions. Since July 2018, Parliament has adopted 17 pieces of legislation, but for
much of that time has been in recess. Among the pieces of legislation were controversial
changes to its rules of procedure. Presidential decrees are also a means of shortening
legislative procedure: 17 have been issued since November 2018. Political polarisation,
especially in the run-up to the 31 March 2019 municipal elections, continues to prevent
constructive parliamentary dialogue. The marginalisation of the opposition, particularly the
People's Democratic Party (HDP), continues, and many HDP members of parliament are in
detention. The long-standing shortcomings of the system of parliamentary immunity have
not been addressed.
Following the entry into force of the new presidential system, one Vice-President and
sixteen ministers were appointed on 10 July 2018 directly by the President without any
parliamentary approval, proposal or hearing. The number of members of parliament was
increased from 550 to 600 in line with the revised constitutional provision. Growing
political polarisation and strong partisan competition continue to prevent constructive
parliamentary dialogue between parties. The second largest opposition party, the People's
Democratic Party (HDP), whose two former co-chairs Selahattin Demirtaş and Figen
Yüksekdağ, nine former deputies and other party executives remain under arrest on
terrorism-related charges, continues to be particularly marginalised. The parliamentary
immunity regime in Turkey needs to be strengthened in order to ensure elected
representatives’ freedom of expression.
The constitutional overhaul has also changed the legislative process. Responsibility for
producing draft legislative proposals lies now with members of parliament, rather than with
the government. Since June 2018, Parliament has adopted only 17 pieces of legislation out
of the 1 479 bills tabled by members of parliament. Several opposition members have
repeatedly reported that the ruling majority consistently ignored many proposed
amendments (including on important legislation such as the law replacing the state of
emergency). Moreover, under the new system, the drafting of complex legislation, originally
done by line ministries, is now the responsibility of Parliament, which does not yet have the
necessary resources or expertise to do this, which has a severe impact on necessary reforms.
In the new system, constitutional provisions enshrine the principle of the primacy of law
over presidential decree but without control of the Parliament. They also define the

                                              12
 legislative areas that remain the prerogative of Parliament. However, this principle has not
always been respected. Indeed, since November 2018, the president has issued 17
presidential decrees covering a wide range of social and economic policy issues, including
restructuring the public administration, making key public appointments and introducing
major economic policies.
During the state of emergency, Parliament’s legislative powers could be by-passed by
executive decrees. This was used to regulate policy areas beyond those strictly covered by
the state of emergency legislation itself.
Parliamentary oversight of the executive has been weakened still further under the new
presidential system. Presidential decrees remain exempt from parliamentary control.
Parliamentary scrutiny of the decrees issued under the state of emergency is not fully
effective. Under the new presidential system, Parliament is largely unable to exercise its role
of holding the executive to account. The right to put oral questions has been abolished, and
written questions, which can only be addressed to the Vice-President and ministers, are
seldom answered in due time. There has been no improvement in follow-up by the executive
on issues raised as a result of the ordinary mechanisms of parliamentary oversight, such as
committee work or parliamentary inquiry committees.
Parliamentary oversight of public spending needs to be improved. The audit reports from the
Turkish Court of Accounts are only considered in the planning and budget committees in
connection with the approval of the final accounts and the draft government budget for the
following year, but there is no formal parliamentary discussion of these audit reports before
a specialised parliamentary committee.
Limited steps have been taken to align the legal framework on elections and political
parties with European standards, including to partly mitigate the very high. 10% electoral
threshold. Turkey needs to align with the outstanding ODIHR and Venice Commission
recommendations on addressing gaps in the electoral legal framework.
Governance
The President’s executive and legislative powers substantially increased in the constitutional
architecture of the new presidential system. The President has remodelled the executive and
the state administration by means of presidential decrees. The new Presidential system,
including the abolition of the position of Prime Minister and other functions such as under-
secretaries in ministries, has led to more politicisation of the public administration. The
President now has the power to nominate the heads of the vast majority of the public
regulatory authorities. Ahead of the March 2019 municipal elections, the appointment of
trustees to replace municipal executives and elected representatives continued to have a
negative impact on local democracy. A presidential decree adopted in August brings the
budgets of local authorities, professional organisations, foundations and social security
institutions under the control of a single account managed by the Ministry of Treasury and
Finance that answers directly to the President.
The June elections marked the full entry into force of the presidential system that was
agreed by a narrow majority in a referendum in April 2017. The Council of Europe was not
consulted on the constitutional amendments in advance of the vote, and the Council’s
Venice Commission, in its March 2017 opinion, concluded that they represented a
dangerous step backwards in Turkey’s constitutional democratic tradition. The Venice
Commission noted that the state of emergency did not provide a proper democratic setting
for a constitutional referendum. It raised procedural concerns such as the detention of a
significant number of opposition deputies and the fact that the vote was cast without a secret

                                              13
 ballot. The opinion concluded that although every state has the right to choose its own
political system, this right is not unconditional. It said that the principles of the separation of
powers and independence of the judiciary as part of the rule of law must be respected and
built into the political system. The Venice Commission did not find this to be the case in
Turkey. It underlined that the system was characterised by a lack of the checks and balances
required to safeguard against an excessive concentration of power in one single office and to
ensure the independence of the judiciary. Under the presidential system, the president’s
political accountability is limited mainly to elections, and several provisions curtail the
independence of the judiciary from the executive and run counter to European standards.
Under the new presidential system, the office of Prime Minister was abolished, and the
Vice-President and ministers are now appointed directly by the President, with no role for
Parliament. The President has the power to:
 appoint and dismiss senior government officials;
 set national security policies and take the necessary implementation measures;
 declare a state of emergency;
 issue presidential decrees on executive matters outside the scope of the law;
 indirectly dissolve Parliament by calling for new parliamentary and presidential
  elections;
 draw up the government budget;
 veto laws; and
 appoint four of the 13 members of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors and 12 of the
  15 judges of the Constitutional Court.
Traditional instruments of scrutiny of the executive by Parliament, such as a vote of
confidence and the possibility of oral questions to the executive, are no longer possible; only
written questions can be addressed to vice-presidents and ministers. If three-fifths of its
members agree, Parliament is able to launch a parliamentary investigation into alleged
criminal actions by the President, Vice-President and ministers related to their functions.
The principle of precedence of laws over presidential decrees is enshrined in the new
system, and the President may not issue decrees in areas reserved to the legislature by the
Constitution. The President has the power to veto any law, although Parliament can override
this veto if an absolute majority agrees, while Parliament can only apply to the constitutional
court to annul presidential decrees.
A number of presidential decrees have created new agencies and offices, merging ministries
and other institutions. Several key institutions, such as the General Staff, National Intelligence
Agency, National Security Council and Sovereign Wealth Fund have now been attached to
the presidency. As part of this overhaul, nine policy councils, with advisory and coordinating
functions, have been established under the auspices of the presidency. The relationship
between presidency councils, which prepare policymaking recommendations for the President
(and where ministers are not represented), and implementing line ministries, is not yet clear.
The civil service has undergone a wholesale reform that is still not fully complete.
Women’s participation in public service, as well as the percentage of women in senior
managerial positions, needs to be improved (38.41% in 2018). The percentage of women in
senior managerial positions is 9.05%.



                                                14
 As regards local government, arrests of elected local politicians on terrorism-related charges
continued, and some still remain under arrest. Before the March 2019 municipal elections
several municipalities were being run by centrally appointed trustees, mainly on the grounds
that their elected mayors had alleged links to terrorist organisations. It is crucial that voters
are permitted to choose local elected representatives in accordance with Turkish law and with
the European Charter of Local Self-Government, to which Turkey is a party. Arrests and
dismissals of local politicians and appointment of trustees as well as the YSK’s decision to
deny mayorship to HDP candidates in four municipalities in the south-east deprive voters of
political representation at local level, and seriously risk damaging local democracy.
A presidential decree published in August 2018 effectively connects all local authority
budgets to the Minister of Treasury and Finance. Professional organisations established by
law or under the Constitution, foundations and social security institutions are all covered by
the decree. Though the establishment of the Single Treasury Institutional Account has the
advantage of ensuring a more balanced budget between public institutions, since any budget
surplus will be shared, it risks increasing the dependence of local administrations and state
economic enterprises on centralised management, further undermining local democracy.
The Ombudsman has a steady caseload and has been active in raising awareness of its role.
However, the Institution still lacks ex officio powers to initiate investigations and to intervene
in cases with legal remedies, and such limitations curtail effectiveness.
The legal framework does not protect independent regulatory authorities from undue
political interference. Under the new presidential system, many regulatory authorities (such as
the Competition Authority (see Chapter 8 – Competition policy), the Information and
Communication Technologies Board, the Cyber Security Council, the Radio and Television
Supreme Council (see Chapter 10 – Information Society and Media), the Directorate-General
for Rail Regulation (see Chapter 14 – Transport policy), the Regulatory Body of the Atomic
Industry (see Chapter 15 - Energy) and the central bank (see Chapter 17 – Economic and
Monetary Policy) are now directly linked to the Presidency.
Civil society
There has been serious backsliding regarding civil society as it has come under continuous
pressure, notably in the face of a large number of arrests of activists, including human rights
defenders. There is also public stigmatisation of independent civil society organisations and
a recurrent use of bans of demonstrations and other types of gatherings. The space for civil
society organisations working on fundamental rights and freedoms has further shrunk. The
rights-based organisations closed under the state of emergency have not been offered any
legal remedy in relation to confiscations. However, civil society has remained active and
involved in public life as far as possible. Pro-government organisations continued to gain a
more visible role and opportunities for representation. Administrative difficulties for national
and international non-governmental organisations (NGOs) continue to hamper civil society
activities. Since October, following the amendment of Parliament’s rules of procedure, civil
society organisations are excluded from legislative consultation processes at parliamentary
committees. Systematic and inclusive mechanisms for consulting a wide spectrum of civil
society, notably on new legislation and policies, need to be in place and used regularly.
An empowered and diverse civil society is a crucial component of any democratic system and
should be recognised and treated as such by the state institutions. Turkish civil society
organisations (CSOs) continued to make crucial contributions on key challenges facing the
country, notably in the areas of education, female workforce participation, awareness-raising


                                               15
 regarding ethnic and social tolerance, and support for refugees. There are a limited number of
CSOs operating in the field of human rights.
However, civil society continued to face increasing pressure, in particular following the high
number of detentions and arrests of activists and human rights defenders. The indictment of
Osman Kavala, a prominent human rights defender who was held for more than a year
without charge, together with 15 other human rights activists, is deeply worrying, and is
emblematic of the shrinking public space and uncertainty in which civil society organisations
are trying to operate. Smear campaigns in some media outlets against some of these activists,
including for accepting funds from international donors, are a recurrent feature and a matter of
serious concern. Furthermore, leaks continued of confidential dossiers on human rights
defenders in prison, while their legal procedures were still ongoing, by media groups with
close ties to the authorities. Defamatory public rhetoric cast serious doubt on Turkey’s respect
for due process and the presumption of innocence. International NGOs also faced difficulties
in their work in Turkey, including those providing humanitarian aid to refugees. No effective
domestic remedy has yet been made available for the confiscation of assets from civil society
organisations closed by emergency decrees.
The Directorate-General for Relations with Civil Society was established within the Ministry
of Interior, replacing the Department of Associations. The mandate and priorities of this unit,
including the drafting of an overarching strategy for civil society or the improvement of the
legal framework, remain unclear. A regulation issued in October 2018 makes it compulsory
for all associations to register all their members (not only their board members) in the
information system of the Ministry of Interior. This is not in line with the OSCE/Council of
Europe guidelines on freedom of association.
Other barriers to civil society and freedom of association remain. Cumbersome administrative
procedures imposed on NGOs by the authorities are still in place. Provisions restricting
registration, procedures for obtaining required permits and the functioning of associations
need to be revised, including facilitating the work of international NGOs working with
refugees in Turkey.
The Law on Collection of Aid imposes burdensome requirements that discourage fundraising
activities by civil society organisations. These include prior authorisation for each fundraising
activity and long authorisation processes based on non-objective criteria. Public funds are not
distributed in a transparent way and the process does not allow the full involvement of civil
society organisations and other stakeholders at every stage. The existing tax system makes it
difficult for foundations and associations to function and develop. ‘Public benefit’ (for
associations) or ‘tax exemption’ (for foundations) status is vaguely defined, and the decision-
making process is not transparent. The environment for foreign donors, which provide
financial support to the Turkish civil society under the current Turkish legislation, is
increasingly shrinking notably because of unfounded public allegations, for example in the
Gezi case.
There is no comprehensive government strategy in place for cooperation with civil society.
There is still no coordination body for monitoring, no transparent mechanism for public
funding and no fiscal incentives for civil society organisations. Independent rights-based civil
society organisations are mostly excluded from the consultations that are part of law-making
and policymaking processes and monitoring. Overall, the legal, financial and administrative
environment needs to be more conducive to developing civil society.
Civilian oversight of the security and intelligence sector
Presidential decrees resulted in the overhaul of the legal and institutional framework

                                               16
 governing the security sector. Amendments to the legal framework accorded broad powers
over the security forces to the executive branch. Dismissals and arrests in relation to the
attempted coup of July 2016 have continued. By December 2018, a total of 15 242 military
officers were dismissed from the service due to their alleged links to the Gülen movement
while 5 783 former military personnel were also arrested on grounds of their alleged
involvement in the averted coup. Security and intelligence services continue to lack sufficient
transparency and accountability before Parliament.
A Presidential decree of July 2018 overhauled the organisational structure and accountability
lines of the Turkish armed forces. The General Staff and all force commands have been
subordinated to the Ministry of National Defence. All military hierarchy is now accountable
to the President, who is legally entitled to give orders directly to the chief of general staff,
force commanders and their subordinates. The Supreme Military Council was restructured to
strengthen civilian presence, with the designation of the Vice-President and Treasury and
Finance and Education Ministers as members. High military courts were abolished, and
civilian higher courts have reviewed the appeals against the decisions of military courts.
Despite these recognised improvements, some issues remain. The military, police and
intelligence services continue to lack sufficient transparency and accountability to Parliament.
Security personnel continue to have wide-ranging legal protection. Despite credible reporting
of serious allegations of human rights violations and of the disproportionate use of force by
security forces in the south-east, the track record of judicial and administrative examination of
such allegations remains poor. The parliamentary law enforcement oversight commission
remained ineffective. The legal framework for overseeing military expenditure has not yet
been improved.
Situation in the east and south-east
The situation in the south-east has continued to be challenging despite an improved security
environment. The Government continued security operations against the background of the
recurrent violent acts by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and PKK-affiliated groups. The
PKK remains on the EU list of persons, groups and entities involved in acts of terrorism.
While the Government has a legitimate right to fight terrorism, it is also responsible for
ensuring that this is done in accordance with the rule of law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Anti-terror measures need to be proportionate. The Government’s investment plan
for reconstruction of damaged areas in the south-east, announced in September 2016, led to
the ongoing construction of many dwellings. The compensation process and distribution
criteria of housing for internally displaced persons are not transparent. There were no visible
developments on the resumption of a credible political process to achieve a peaceful and
sustainable solution.
The PKK or its affiliated groups continued to commit violent terrorist attacks during the
reporting period. Terrorist attacks by the PKK targeted cities in the south-east and east of
Turkey, which resulted in deaths and injuries. The EU unambiguously condemned these
attacks and expressed solidarity with the families of the victims. Subsequent to Abdullah
Öcalan’s lawyers’ visit of their client on 2 May 2019 and the CPT visit from 6 to 16 May, the
Turkish Minister of Justice stated on 16 May that the ban on these visits was lifted.
Province governorates reacted by declaring intermittent curfews and security zones in mostly
rural settlements. The Venice Commission’s recommendations in its June 2016 opinion on the
legal framework governing curfews are yet to be implemented. Investigations into the deaths
of civilians in 2015 during security operations under curfews in towns such as Cizre have not
progressed. In November 2018, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) held an


                                               17
 admissibility hearing in 34 ongoing applications in relation to curfews during which people
lost their lives in Cizre, in the province of Şırnak and in the Sur district of Diyarbakir. The
Council of Europe’s Human Rights Commissioner is a third party to this case. In February
2019, the ECtHR rejected a number of related complaints as inadmissible due to non-
exhaustion of domestic remedies.
Human rights organisations and opposition parties reported serious violations of human rights
by security forces, including alleged instances of torture, ill-treatment, arbitrary arrests and
breaches of procedural rights. The report by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights of February 2017 still needs follow up; it stated that there is no evidence of
effective and independent investigations into the reported killings or the numerous other
serious human rights violations allegedly committed between July 2015 and December 2016
during security operations. As also reported by the UN Commissioner, human rights
defenders still face major difficulties in accessing areas affected by ongoing violence, which
impedes their work on the forced disappearances that occurred in the 1990s. A very broad
interpretation of the fight against terrorism, growing restrictions put in place during and after
the state of emergency on the rights of journalists, the Bar Associations and Human rights
defenders (HRDs) working on the Kurdish issue are among issues raising concern. Other
associations and Kurdish-language media outlets and cultural rights institutions remained
closed.
There were numerous new detentions and arrests of elected representatives and municipal
executives in the east and south-east under terrorism-related charges, and serious concerns
regarding the YSK’s decision not to let elected mayors take office and to recognise second-
placed candidates as mayors (See section above — Governance).
The South-Eastern Anatolia Project (GAP) continues to operate with the objective of
improving socioeconomic development in the region. The Government’s investment plan for
post-conflict reconstructing of damaged areas in the south-east, announced in September
2016, has led to the ongoing construction of thousands of dwellings. Some initial work was
done by the Government to restore the cultural, historical and religious heritage sites damaged
in 2015 and 2016. Beyond the restoration carried out by the Government of the Armenian
Catholic Church, restoration works have started in 2019 on the Surp Giragos Church and the
Mar Petyun Chaldean Church. Civil society has continued to be critical of projects such as the
Ilısu Dam which risks damaging natural habitats, agricultural land and historical heritage sites
such as Hasankeyf.
There is still no comprehensive, consistent approach in relation to missing persons, to the
exhumation of mass graves and to the independent investigation of all alleged cases of
extrajudicial killing by security and law enforcement officers. The February 2017 Council of
Europe report on missing persons and victims of enforced disappearance highlighted the
excessive length of trials. Most of the investigations into cases of enforced disappearances
from the 1990s are, or will soon be, facing the 20-year statute of limitations. However, the
UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances (WGEID) assessed that
enforced disappearances are not subject to statutes of limitation, thereby providing a
guarantee against impunity.
The 2015 recommendations by the UN Special Rapporteur to tackle the lack of prosecutions
over extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions remain unaddressed. The village guard
system is still in place, despite criticism. There were reported incidents of human rights
violations. More than 600 village guards were removed from duty due to involvement in
criminal activities.


                                               18
 Refugees and internally displaced persons
Turkey hosts the largest number of refugees worldwide; in February 2019, it was sheltering
and meeting the needs of approximately 3.6 million Syrians and 370 000 other nationalities.
Some 142 000 Syrian nationals under temporary protection live in 13 temporary
accommodation centres run by the Directorate-General for Migration Management. Turkey
has made sustained significant efforts to provide support for refugees and ensure wider access
to healthcare and schooling, with 65% of Syrian children now in school. Many cities provide
municipal services to refugees. Of one million Syrians of school age in Turkey, about 635 000
now have access to primary and secondary education, up from 605 000 last year. In May
2018, the number of Syrians under temporary protection who held work permits stood at
43 000 (see Chapter 24 – Justice, freedom and security).
Civil society reports highlight some problems, such as high rates of child labour and truancy
rates among refugees and asylum seekers, particularly non-Syrians. Many refugees and
asylum seekers are exploited in the informal economy and their poverty inhibits access to
protection.
There has been limited progress on the situation of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
resulting from the violence in the south-east, and a small percentage of IDPs have been
offered new housing. This process is not based on a comprehensive and transparent
mechanism (see section above – Situation in the east and south-east).
2.1.2.   Public administration reform
Turkey is moderately prepared in public administration reform. There has been serious
backsliding in the area of public service and human resources management, which has also
affected policy development and accountability. A major re-structuring of the public
administration and civil service system took place through presidential decrees. Changes to
the civil service system have further increased the politicisation of the administration. An
effective remedy still needs to be provided for the large-scale dismissals that took place
during the state of emergency. In the absence of a comprehensive public administration
reform strategy, there is no systematic approach to reform. The low level of female
representation in the higher echelons of bureaucracy remains a concern. The Commission’s
recommendations from 2018 have not yet been implemented, and therefore remain valid.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
→ ensure that the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures provides for an
effective remedy, which safeguards the right of every individual to a fair administrative
process;
→ prepare changes to its legislation to introduce a merit-based, competitive appointment
system for senior managerial positions in the civil service;
→ review the policy-making process with a view to ensuring inclusive and evidence-based
preparation of policy planning documents and legislative proposals.
Strategic framework for public administration reform
Turkey still lacks an overarching public administration reform strategic framework,
including on public financial management. There are various planning documents and
sectoral policy documents on different aspects of public administration reform, but the lack of
political support hinders comprehensive reform efforts. An administrative unit with a legal
mandate to coordinate, design, implement and monitor public administration reform has not
yet been established. Such a unit would need to coordinate closely with the Ministry of

                                              19
 Finance and Treasury, to ensure coherence of strategic and fiscal planning and efficiently
address managerial accountability (see Chapter 32). The financial sustainability of the
overall public administration reform is not guaranteed, as key planning documents do not
specify the expected costs of reform measures.
Policy development and coordination
The extensive restructuring of the executive branch, which took place without any public
consultation, resulted in further centralisation of the policy-making system. Policy
coordination among central government institutions has remained strong, but planning,
monitoring and reporting of whole-of-government performance continue to be inadequate.
There are no regulations that describe rules of procedure and processes within the overall
decision-making process of the government, risking potential policy and legislative overlaps.
The policy-planning process within government departments needs to be improved to ensure
greater participation and accountability. Nine Presidential Policy Councils, which have
advisory and coordination functions over sectoral policies, were established, but their relation
to the work of individual government departments is not yet clear. This is particularly evident
in economic planning, where policy programmes do not have a systematic link with fiscal
planning.
Legislative development and policy formulation have not pursued an inclusive and
evidence-based approach. This has worsened with the transition to the presidential system, as
responsibility for producing draft legislative proposals lies now with Members of Parliament,
rather than with the Government. Public consultation is extremely rare, and inter-ministerial
coordination is complicated by the administrative overhaul that accompanied the new
presidential system.
Public financial management
There has been little progress in public financial management, notably because of the
increased number of exceptions to the public procurement law, late adoption of the budget
and frequent and unannounced changes to tax policy. An independent fiscal council aiming to
ensure fiscal discipline is yet to be established. In the absence of adequate ex post monitoring
and reporting, major public investment programmes lack transparency. Budget transparency
needs to be further improved, with the participation of civil society (see Chapters 5, 16, 17
and 32).
Public service and human resources management
The amendments to the civil service system have endangered merit-based recruitment,
promotion and appointment to managerial posts. Senior managerial posts, i.e.
undersecretary and deputy undersecretary posts, have been abolished, and their duties have
been taken over by politically appointed deputy ministers, resulting in further politicisation of
the civil service. The large-scale dismissals of public servants during the state of emergency
have remained a matter of concern. While the legal framework provides uniform criteria for
demotion, dismissals and disciplinary measures and ensures a possibility for appeal,
large-scale dismissals during the state of emergency did not identify evidence relating to each
individual dismissal case and lacked minimum procedural safeguards for those who were
dismissed.
The State Personnel Administration was closed in July 2018 and replaced by the Human
Resources office under the President of the Republic. However, given its current limited size,
it is unclear to what extent it can cover the functions of the State Personnel Administration
and ensure central coordination of human resources management in the public sector.


                                               20
 The civil service remuneration system is not standardised across institutions and lacks
transparency. Although central institutions offer some training and are responsible for some
aspects of training policy, the administration lacks sufficient tools to support the
professional development of civil servants. While integrity in public service is boosted by
ethics committees and an ethics board, no integrity plans have been issued since 2014.
Accountability of the administration
In the new presidential system, the organisation of state administration follows extremely
centralised lines of accountability to the Presidency. Most executive institutions are formally
embedded in ministries, although they retain autonomy over day-to-day operational
management. The roles and responsibilities of different institutions are not yet fully clear,
which risks reducing transparency and accountability. Accountability of agencies is weak,
and internal control and audit do not function optimally (see Chapter 32).
Internal and external oversight arrangements to ensure citizens’ right to good
administration need to be better implemented. The role of oversight institutions such as the
Ombudsman needs to be further improved, in the absence of ex officio powers (see
Governance). Citizens’ right to access public information is regulated by the law on the
right to information, which does not require proactive disclosure of information and provides
for broad exemptions on grounds of protecting state secrets, commercial secrets and personal
data. A simplified online access system received millions of applications for access to
information in 2018. The Board of Review of Access to Information is responsible for
considering appeals filed against a refusal to provide access to public information. Citizens’
rights to administrative justice and their right to seek compensation have remained
problematic and the backlog of cases has increased as a result of the measures taken under the
state of emergency.
Service delivery to citizens and businesses
Strong commitment to a user-oriented administration has continued. E-government
services have continued to expand. The number of registered users grew to 40 million in
2018, a significant increase from 25.2 million in 2015. Public services are to a large extent
accessible through e-government tools. One-stop-shops and points of single contact for
citizens, particularly at local level, need to be further extended. A monitoring system needs to
be set up to reduce barriers to accessing services for people with disabilities.
Simplifying administrative procedures and cutting red tape is hindered by the absence of a
law on general administrative procedures, which is necessary to provide citizens and
businesses with greater legal certainty.
2.2.     Rule of law and fundamental rights
2.2.1.   Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights
Turkey is at an early stage of applying the acquis and European standards in this area.
Backsliding continued, and the recommendations in the previous reports were not accepted
or implemented. Political pressure on judges and prosecutors and transfers of a large number
of judges and prosecutors against their will continued. This continued to have a significant
negative effect on the independence and overall quality and efficiency of the judiciary.
Despite their acquittal, a large number of judges or prosecutors who had been subject to
criminal charges were not returned to the profession.
Overall, corruption is widespread and remains an issue of concern. There has been no
revision of the anti-corruption framework to address the gaps.


                                              21
 Fundamental rights have been considerably curtailed under the state of emergency and
pursuant to the decrees and legislation adopted during and after it. This has led to very
limited progress on the outstanding issues identified in previous reports, namely the
termination of the state of emergency. Nevertheless, further backsliding continued in all areas
of human rights, most notably on freedom of expression including freedom of press, freedom
of assembly and association, protection of human rights defenders, property rights and
procedural rights. No legal improvements have taken place concerning the removal of crucial
safeguards protecting detainees from abuse, or prosecuting civilians who committed crimes
while resisting the 2016 attempted coup, as well as any acts in the aftermath of the attempted
coup.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 revise the legislation so that it is compatible with the ECHR and the ECtHR case law;
 reinstate the necessary conditions to ensure the independence, impartiality, accountability,
  quality, efficiency and professionalism of the judiciary;
 ensure that its international obligations are respected in relation to fundamental rights and
  freedoms, and effectively address serious human rights violations, including respecting
  the right to a fair trial and effectively investigating allegations of violations of the ECHR
  and other international Conventions to which it is a party.
Functioning of the judiciary
Turkey is at an early stage in this area. Serious backsliding continued. Concerns on the
independence of the Turkish judiciary following, among other issues, the dismissal and
forced removal of 30% of judges and prosecutors following the 2016 attempted coup remain.
The recruitment of new judges and prosecutors under the current system added to the
concerns, as no measures were taken to address the lack of objective, merit-based, uniform
and pre-established criteria for their recruitment and promotion. The chilling effect of the
dismissals and forced transfers on the judiciary is still observed, and risks engendering
widespread self-censorship among judges and prosecutors. This may weaken the judiciary as
a whole, its independence and the separation of powers. No measures were taken to restore
legal guarantees to ensure the independence of the judiciary from the executive or to
strengthen the independence of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors (CJP). No changes
were made to the institution of criminal judges of peace, which risks becoming a parallel
system. The recommendations from earlier reports therefore remain valid.
In the coming year, Turkey should:
 create a political and legal environment that allows the judiciary to perform its duties
  independently and impartially, respecting European standards; strengthen judicial
  responsibilities, with the executive and legislature fully respecting the separation of
  powers; and ensure that judgments by the Constitutional Court, whose decisions should
  follow ECtHR jurisprudence delivered in a timely manner, are respected by lower courts;
 implement Venice Commission (VC) recommendations, also on criminal judges of peace,
  to ensure that decisions on detentions take effect only if approved by a trial court;
 limit the role and influence of the executive within the Council of Judges and Prosecutors
  (CJP) and provide effective guarantees against transfers of judges against their will;
 introduce further safeguards against any interference by the Council of Judges and
  Prosecutors in judicial proceedings;


                                              22
  guarantee the principle of administrative and financial autonomy of the Justice Academy
  in accordance with European standards, since the independence and composition of the
  authority responsible for training and its content is a corollary of the general principle of
  judicial independence. Increase its capacity to train candidates fully and to prepare them
  to effectively manage their future tasks;
 limit any suspension of judges, as a major infringement of guaranteed judicial
  independence under the Constitution, to cases where there are well-founded suspicions of
  serious misbehaviour; ensure that the system of disciplinary proceedings and promotions
  for judges and prosecutors is guided by objective criteria without undue influence from
  the executive;
 in relation to the administrative and judicial measures taken against individuals, ensure
  that any allegation of wrongdoing or crime is subject to due process, based on evidence,
  in line with fully transparent procedures under the authority of an independent judiciary
  respecting the fair trial criteria of the ECtHR. These procedures must fully respect
  fundamental rights, including procedural rights, in particular the presumption of
  innocence, individual criminal responsibility, legal certainty, the right to a defence, the
  right to a fair trial, equality of arms and right to an effective appeal.
Strategic documents
A judicial reform strategy for 2019-2023 was announced in August 2018 but the strategy has
not yet been adopted. Consultations on the draft strategy have taken place, including of the
Council of Europe and the Commission, which asked the Turkish authorities to take its
comments into consideration when reviewing the draft.
Management bodies
Since May 2017, the CJP continued to function based on the structure adopted by the
constitutional amendments with 13 members (four members appointed by the President,
seven members appointed by the Parliament, in addition to the Minister of Justice and the
Deputy Minister). The procedure governing the appointment of CJP members continues to
raise serious concerns in relation to its independence from the executive. A budget of TRY 65
million was allocated to the CJP under the 2018 budget for central administration and TRY
77 million in 2019. Improved transparency, full independence from the executive and strict
adherence to procedures in line with European standards are urgently needed to restore not
only the CJP’s credibility, but also public trust in the entire judiciary.
Independence and impartiality
The Justice Academy of Turkey (JAT) was re-established by Presidential Decree on 1 May
2019. It replaced the previous Justice Academy that was closed under the state of emergency.
Its duties at that time were taken over by the Judges and Prosecutors Training Centre in the
Ministry of Justice. According to the decree, the JAT will be responsible for all pre-service
training of candidate judges and prosecutors as well as the in-service training. It is affiliated
to the Ministry of Justice but has scientific, administrative and financial autonomy. The JAT
will have a president and a maximum of four heads of department. It will also have a
Consultative Committee, tasked to make proposals.
Detentions and court cases against judges and prosecutors, and transfers, continued. No legal
and constitutional guarantees were introduced to prevent judges and prosecutors from being
transferred against their will. Concerns remained as regards the perceived influence of the
executive over the decisions of the criminal judges of peace and their jurisdiction and
practice. These particularly relate to their extensive powers and to the fact that objections to

                                               23
 their decisions are not reviewed by a higher judicial body but by another single-judge
institution. Their rulings increasingly diverge from ECtHR case law and rarely provide
sufficiently individualised reasoning. Defence lawyers’ access to their clients’ court files for
a specific catalogue of crimes are restricted until the indictment has been issued. Sometimes
this takes more than a year.
The closure of associations critical of the Government has had negative effects on pluralism
in judges associations, and has led to a growing hesitation to become members of such
associations.
Ceremonies for new judges and prosecutors and the opening of the judicial year are held in
the Presidential Palace. Such events contribute to the perception of an increased politicisation
and influence of the executive over the judiciary. Public comments especially incriminating
ones, on ongoing judicial cases by representatives of the executive and legislative branches
disregard the presumption of innocence of the suspects, and cast serious doubt on respect for
due process. They have a serious chilling effect on the judges and prosecutors who deal with
these cases. Long detention and pre-trial periods have become the norm rather than the
exception.
Accountability
In 2018, nearly all judges had declared their assets as required by law. The disciplinary
procedures system for both judges and prosecutors has been perceived as undermining
important guarantees that safeguard the independence of the judiciary. Mechanisms to detect
breaches of the integrity rules and to enforce disciplinary penalties are in place but need to be
made effective and free from political interference. The Office of Judicial Ethics was founded
in February 2016. The CJP adopted the Code of Judicial Ethics in March 2019.
Professionalism and competence
As of February 2019, 10,000 candidate judges and prosecutors had been integrated into the
judicial and administrative jurisdictions since the attempted coup, following an accelerated
and non-transparent selection process. Concerns remain over the lack of objective,
merit-based, uniform and pre-established criteria for recruiting and promoting judges and
prosecutors. The CJP is not sufficiently independent from the executive, and the Ministry of
Justice supervises the selection boards for new judges and prosecutors, and manages their
yearly appraisal. The CJP itself plays no role in the selection boards, even though it takes the
final decision on recruitment. 2 new regional Courts of Appeals were opened. 116 new
members were appointed to the Court of Cassation and the Council of State in July with the
declared objective of decreasing the workload in these institutions.
Quality of justice
The large increase in the number of inexperienced judges and prosecutors in recent years and
the drastic reduction of the duration of in-service training have seriously impacted on the
skills of the future judges and prosecutors needed to effectively manage the case law and
tackle the workload.
The Justice Academy should be allocated sufficient resources to tackle the increased need for
pre-service and in-service training for newly recruited judges and prosecutors.
Frequent transfers of judges and prosecutors have negatively affected the quality of justice.
Overall, there are serious concerns regarding the quality of judicial decisions, particularly in
terrorism-related cases, in terms of their legal reasoning and the factual evidence on which
they are based. Indictments often reflect allegations, and are not supported by credible
evidence. These indictments, which are sometimes based on statements by people who have

                                               24
 been accused in other cases or by secret witnesses, raise serious concerns. In some cases,
evidence and arguments presented by the defence are not reflected in the Court’s assessment.
During court hearings, suspects and witnesses are generally not brought to the courthouse and
are heard through an audiovisual information system. This hampers the communication of the
defence and the accused, and should be limited to the necessary cases.
Lawyers who provide legal assistance to human rights defenders and civil and political
activists also face obstacles in performing their work and, in some cases, are subjected to
arrest, detention and prosecution. This should be prevented at all costs. There are around 500
lawyers under arrest and awaiting trial.
2 new departments for mediation and for alternative dispute resolution were created in the
Ministry of Justice. Efforts continued to increase and promote alternative dispute resolution
methods to help reduce the burden on the courts. In July 2018, a regulation on the
implementation of the Mediation Law on Civil Disputes entered into force.
Efficiency
There is no human resources strategy for the judiciary, which struggles to effectively
perform its tasks in the wake of the strong reduction of experienced personnel. The
recruitment of a large number of inexperienced judges and prosecutors using fast-track
procedures without adequate in-service and pre-service training failed to remedy the
concerns.
Regarding the backlog of cases, the numbers of pending cases in the high courts in December
2018 were 40 636 for the Constitutional Court and 174 632 for the Council of State. In 2018,
the Court of Cassation received a total of 1 017 969 cases (352 285 new cases and 665 684
cases transferred from 2017), and dealt with 511 508 cases, resulting in a reduced backlog of
506 461 cases by the end of 2018. These regional courts of appeal continued to operate, but
for both civil and criminal cases, their clearance rate remained below 100%, which is
leading to a growing backlog.
As regards first instance courts, the clearance rate for criminal courts in 2018 was 53.3%
compared to 55% in 2016. The total number of cases finalised in 2018 was 1 518 024
compared to 1 324 153 in 2016. As regards the total length of proceedings it went up from
274 days to 294 days.
Systemic solutions are still needed, therefore, to further address the emerging backlog and the
excessive length of some trials. As of early 2018, there are 13.9 judges and 5.9 prosecutors
per 100 000 inhabitants (16 104 judges and prosecutors in total). According to the European
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ), the European average is 21 judges/11
prosecutors per 100 000 inhabitants.
Fight against corruption
Turkey is at an early stage in the fight against corruption. There was backsliding, since
dismantled preventive bodies have not been replaced by an independent body, in line with the
United Nations Convention against Corruption to which Turkey is party. No progress was
made on closing a variety of legislative gaps. Both the legal framework and the institutional
setup continued to allow undue executive influence in the investigation and prosecution of
high-profile corruption cases, and need to be improved in line with international standards.
Limited accountability and transparency of public institutions have remained a matter of
concern. The absence of a robust anti-corruption strategy and action plan is a sign of lack of
political will to fight decisively against corruption. The Council of Europe’s Group of States
against Corruption (GRECO) recommendations have not yet been implemented. Overall,

                                              25
 corruption is widespread and remains an issue of concern. There is a need for strong political
will to effectively address corruption issues, as well as a robust criminal justice response to
high-level corruption. In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 effectively implement its international obligations in relation to the fight against
  corruption, including the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the Council
  of Europe Conventions;
 ensure effective follow-up to the recommendations issued by the GRECO, including by
  adopting the necessary legislation;
 establish a track record of successful prosecution of, and convictions for, high-level
  corruption;
 adopt an anti-corruption strategy, reflecting a clear political will and vision to effectively
  address corruption, underpinned by a credible and realistic action plan.
Track record
The existing legal framework and institutional architecture enables the executive branch to
exert undue political influence on judges and prosecutors, law enforcement officers and
inspectors. Therefore, Turkey’s track record of investigation, prosecution and conviction in
corruption cases has remained poor, particularly in relation to high-level corruption cases
implicating politicians and public officials. Sentences do not have a deterrent effect, and
convicts can benefit from deferred sentences for some offences. The track record of
cooperation by audit and inspection units with prosecutions remained poor. Local
administrations, land administration and management, public procurement processes, and the
construction and transportation industries, including when implemented via public-private
partnerships, remained particularly prone to corruption.
Some of the GRECO recommendations calling for the adoption of new laws and practices on
political contributions and expenditure, as well as public disclosure, have yet to be addressed.
Turkish authorities publish no data on corruption cases.
Institutional framework
Prevention measures
No permanent, functionally independent anti-corruption body exists. The level of
coordination between various preventive bodies remained inadequate. The Prime Ministry
Inspection Board, which used to coordinate preventive anti-corruption measures, ceased to
exist with the transition to the presidential system. The State Supervisory Council, which
assumed some of the duties and powers of the Prime Ministry Inspection Board, lacks
independence. The legal framework of anti-corruption also remains weak in the private
sector. There have been no regular awareness-raising campaigns on transparency and the
fight against corruption.
Law enforcement
No specialised prosecution service to lead anti-corruption investigations has been established.
There are also few specialised courts. The executive has retained undue political influence
over officers acting as judicial police, thereby preventing them from carrying out effective
investigations. Inter-agency cooperation and information-sharing between law enforcement
and the financial intelligence unit need to be further developed. Financial investigations are
not systematically started in corruption and organised crime cases. Financial control of
political parties remained ineffective.


                                              26
 Legal framework
Turkey is party to all international anti-corruption conventions, including the United Nations
Convention Against corruption, which Turkey still needs to implement fully.
The legislative amendments envisaged in previous anti-corruption strategies, i.e. the Law on
General Administrative Procedure, the Law on Public Procurement, the Code of Ethics
for Members of Parliament and the Law on Whistle-blower Protection, have not been
implemented. The legal framework on whistle-blower protection still needs to be aligned
with the new EU acquis on this issue. The anti-corruption action plan (2016) has not been
followed up and lacks political ownership. Turkey has not aligned with GRECO
recommendations on judicial independence or transparency of the legislative process and
political financing. Turkey has implemented satisfactorily seven of the seventeen
recommendations contained in GRECO's Third Round Evaluation Report.
Shortcomings remain unaddressed in the corruption-related provisions of the Criminal Code,
which do not meet the standards put in place by the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption.
The definition of active bribery, though covered in Article 252 of the Turkish Criminal Code,
is still not in line with international conventions. The shortcomings concern, in particular, the
provisions on bribery in the private sector.
Public procurement legislation is not in line with the EU acquis. The vast and increasing
number of exemptions inserted into the framework law on public procurement has become a
matter of growing concern. In particular, tenders at municipal level and for public-private
partnerships for large infrastructure investments remained prone to corruption. The legal
privileges of public officials, such as the requirement for prior authorisation from their
hierarchy before starting an investigation of alleged wrongdoing, continued to provide legal
protection for public officials in anti-corruption criminal and administrative investigations.
The legal framework on preventing, prosecuting and issuing penalties for conflicts of interest
as well as on declaring, verifying and disclosing assets remained inadequate. Turkey has no
legislation governing lobbying.
Strategic framework
The 2010-2014 anti-corruption strategy and action plan failed to meet most of their initial
objectives. Measures envisaged in the transparency and anti-corruption action plan
announced in 2016 have not yet been followed up. Turkey needs to strengthen its overall
capacity to coordinate, implement and monitor all anti-corruption actions among the many
relevant preventive institutions and law enforcement agencies.
Fundamental rights
After two years of rapid deterioration of the human rights situation, Turkey’s state of
emergency finally ended on 18 July 2018. However, this was not accompanied by concrete
steps to improve the human rights in the country. Instead, many of the measures introduced
during the state of emergency remain in force today, and continue to have a profound and
devastating impact on Turkish citizens.
The legal framework includes general guarantees of respect for human and fundamental
rights but still needs to be brought into line with ECHR and ECtHR case law on guarantees of
respect for human and fundamental rights. Serious backsliding in the areas of freedom of
expression, freedom of assembly, freedom of association, and procedural and property rights
continued. Restrictions imposed on the activities of journalists, academics, human rights
defenders and critical voices on a broad scale have a negative effect on the exercise of these
freedoms, and lead to self-censorship. Legislation introduced immediately after the lifting of

                                               27
 the state of emergency removed crucial safeguards protecting detainees from abuse, thereby
augmenting the risk of impunity for the perpetrators of such abuse. The enforcement of rights
is hindered by the fragmentation and limited independence of public institutions responsible
for protecting human rights and freedoms, and the lack of an independent judiciary. The
Council of Europe continued its monitoring of Turkey’s respect for fundamental freedoms.
The lack of institutional independence, lengthy review procedures, the absence of sufficiently
individualised criteria, and the absence of a proper means of defence resulted in the failure by
the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures to provide an effective recourse
against dismissals so far.
Turkey should in particular:
 effectively ensure full respect for fundamental rights and freedoms;
 align Turkish criminal and anti-terror legislation and their interpretation with European
  standards and ECtHR case-law and Venice Commission recommendations;
 ensure that all public-sector employees arbitrarily dismissed during the state of
  emergency are appropriately compensated for any harm, including loss of earnings;
 ensure that any allegation of wrongdoing or crime is subject to due process, based on
  evidence and fully transparent procedures under the authority of an independent judiciary,
  and fully respecting relevant procedural rights, in particular the presumption of
  innocence, individual criminal responsibility, legal certainty, the right to defence, the
  right to a fair trial, equality of arms and the right to an effective appeal;
 ensure the effectiveness of the Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures
  as a domestic remedy.
Turkey is party to most international human rights instruments. The Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the International
Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearance, have yet to be
ratified. The Turkish Parliament ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child in 2017; it entered into force in March 2018.
Following the lifting of the state of emergency, Turkey revoked its derogations to the
European Convention on Human Rights and to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) in August 2018.
In 2018, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) found violations of the ECHR in
142 cases (out of 146) relating mainly to the right to fair trial (41), freedom of expression
(40), the right to liberty and security (29), freedom of assembly and association (11),
inhuman or degrading treatment (11), and prohibition of torture (10). During the reporting
period, 6 717 new applications were registered by the ECtHR. In January 2019, the total
number of Turkish applications pending before the Court was 7 107. There are currently 410
cases against Turkey in the enhanced monitoring procedure.
In November 2018, the ECtHR announced its judgement in the case of Selahattin Demirtaş v.
Turkey (no. 2), which found several violations of the ECHR, and ordered the termination of
the applicant’s pre-trial detention. In February 2019, the ECtHR declared applications
concerning events during curfews imposed in the city of Cizre inadmissible. In the case of
Kavala v. Turkey, the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights informed the
Court in November 2018 of her decision to intervene in the case. In January 2019, she
submitted an observation in which she evaluates ‘the arrest, initial and continued detention of


                                              28
 the applicant as forming part of a broader pattern of escalating reprisals in Turkey against
civil society activists and human rights defenders for their legitimate work’.
The implementation of the Cyprus v. Turkey case regarding missing persons and restrictions
on the property rights of Greek Cypriots displaced or living permanently in the northern part
of Cyprus is still pending, as is the question of ‘just satisfaction’ (compensation). Regarding
the implementation of the Demopoulos v. Turkey decision of 5 March 2010, 6 538
applications from Greek Cypriot owners have to date been lodged with the Immovable
Property Commission (IPC), 105 of them during the reporting period. As of March 2019, 964
applications had been concluded through amicable settlements and 33 through formal
hearings. Altogether, the IPC has so far paid out the equivalent of EUR 349 million in
compensation. In December 2018, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
reviewed Cyprus v. Turkey as well as Varnava and others and Xenides-Arestis group v.
Turkey. No progress was made on any of those cases.
In its judgement on the Güzelyurtlu and others v. Cyprus and Turkey case of January 2019,
the ECtHR has found, for the first time, a violation of Article 2 ECHR on the sole basis of a
Turkey’s failure to cooperate with the Republic of Cyprus on criminal matters.
On the promotion and enforcement of human rights, the National Human Rights and
Equality Institution (NHREI) and the Ombudsman, as the main human rights institutions,
continued to receive complaints. The major difference in the scope of intervention of both
institutions lies with the individual application procedure. The Ombudsman Institution deals
only with complaints against the actions of the public administration. The NHREI does not
accept applications that are within the remit of the Ombudsman; therefore, the efficiency and
capacity of the Ombudsman to deal with such applications also need to be stepped up.
Following the appointment of members of the NHREI in March 2017, the institution became
operational in 2018, after its implementing legislation was adopted.
The NHREI has concluded two decisions out of 401 received applications; it has conducted
27 visits and published reports of five visits to some detention centres, prisons and an elderly
home. The speed and effectiveness of the institution in dealing with applications causes
particular concern in light of the high number of alleged violations in the aftermath of the
attempted coup.
Neither of these institutions is operationally, structurally or financially independent, and their
members are not appointed in compliance with the Paris Principles. So far, the NHREI has
not applied for accreditation with the relevant International Coordinating Committee (ICC) of
National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. Turkey should
urgently ensure that any and all cases of alleged human rights violations are effectively dealt
with and processed, and that these bodies fully comply with the Paris Principles and the
European Commission Recommendation on Standards for Equality Bodies, adopted on 22
June 2018.
There was limited implementation of the 2014 action plan on preventing violations of the
ECHR. The implementation reports are not made public, thus limiting the accountability of
institutions responsible for implementation. Turkey needs to update its action plan on the
prevention of the ECtHR violations, since the previous one has expired. Legislative changes,
introduced during and after the state of emergency, which are not in line with European
standards, continue to hamper in particular the right to freedom of expression, freedom of
assembly and the right to a fair trial, to an effective remedy and to protection of property.
Parliament’s Human Rights Inquiry Committee is authorised to visit and observe prisons,
including military prisons, without advance permission; during the reporting period, it visited

                                               29
 three prisons and published two reports. In 2018, 2,229 applications claiming violations of
human rights were referred to the Committee. 1,305 of these applications were lodged during
the previous legislative period, the rest after the June 2018 elections.
Human rights defenders continue to be subject to intimidation, judicial prosecution, violent
attacks, threats, surveillance, prolonged arbitrary detention and ill-treatment. The frequency
and number of detentions and arrests of civil society representatives, journalists, lawyers,
academics and others has increasingly led to a shrinking space for civil society. During the
reporting period, there was a climate of intimidation across society as the Government
continued to use the state of emergency to narrow the space for dissenting or alternative
views.
A law adopted in July 2018 after the lifting of the state of emergency grants provincial
governors wide powers to prevent people from entering or leaving certain locations in their
provinces for up to 15 days, and to prevent all movement or assemblies at particular locations
or times on security grounds. The trials against the group of 10 human rights defenders in
Büyükada Island, and against the former director of Amnesty International Turkey, on
charges of links to a terrorist organisation continued during the reporting period. Osman
Kavala, the chairperson of Anadolu Kültür, remained in detention without indictment for over
a year. An indictment against him and 15 other members of civil society organisations was
filed with a court in March 2019. The confidentiality order in his file has prevented his
lawyers from accessing details of the case.
Lawyers who provide legal assistance to human rights defenders and civil and political
activists face huge obstacles in performing their work and are at risk of arrest, detention and
prosecution.
Concerning the right to life, although Turkey is a party to Protocol 13 of the ECHR,
statements on the possibility of reinstating the death penalty have continued to be made by
public officials, including by the President. In the south-east, there is a lack of credible and
effective investigations into reported killings by the security authorities, as noted by the UN
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Furthermore, alleged cases of abductions and
enforced disappearances by security or intelligence services in several provinces have not
been adequately investigated. Impunity remains for such abuses. Legislation adopted in
June 2016 grants judicial privileges to the security forces, which increase the risk of
impunity.
Allegations of torture and ill treatment remain a serious concern. The repeated extensions
of the state of emergency led to profound human rights violations, and the Government failed
to take steps to investigate, prosecute, and punish members of the security forces and other
officials accused of human rights abuses. The removal of crucial safeguards by means of
emergency decrees has increased the risk of impunity for perpetrators of such crimes, and has
led to allegations of an increase in the number of cases of torture and ill-treatment in custody.
Changes to the anti-terror legislation introduced a maximum pre-trial detention period of up
to 12 days, in contravention of the relevant ECtHR case law (maximum of up to four days).
There are concerns that changes in legislation allowing suspects to be brought back from
prisons to police stations after being arrested have led to more cases of ill-treatment or
torture. The recommendations of the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture following his 2016
visit to the country need to be implemented. In addition, Turkey still needs to implement the
recommendations of the 2016 fourth periodic review by the UN Committee against Torture.
The authorities should also authorise the publication of all pending reports of the Council of
Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture.


                                               30
 The handling of complaints of torture and ill-treatment is also reported to be ineffective, and
allegedly entails a risk of reprisal. Complaints, reports and any indications of torture or
ill-treatment need to be investigated swiftly, effectively and impartially; perpetrators must be
prosecuted and convicted in accordance with the gravity of their acts in line with the
country’s international obligations, in particular with the ECHR and the UN Convention
against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (UN CAT).
The NHREI, which should act as the national preventive mechanism, does not meet the key
requirements under the Optional Protocol to the UN CAT and is not yet effectively
processing cases referred to it. In line with its stated zero tolerance policy for torture, greater
efforts are necessary to ensure that this institution effectively fulfils its mandate, with a
dedicated structure and appropriate resources.
Overcrowding and deteriorating prison conditions continue to be a source of deep concern.
The prison population rate reached 318 per 100,000 inhabitants and, as of December 2018,
the prison population stands at 260,000. At present, 743 children are staying with their
detained mothers. As of December 2018, the total number of detainees in prison without an
indictment or pending trial is 57,000.Over 20% of the total prison population are in prison for
terrorism-related charges. These include journalists, political activists, lawyers and human
rights defenders. There have been many allegations of human rights violations in prisons,
including arbitrary restrictions on the rights of detainees, denial of access to medical care and
the use of torture, mistreatment, prevention of open visits, and solitary confinement. In late
autumn 2018, hunger strikes were initiated to protest the alleged isolations in the prison
island Imralı; these have continued, and involve around 300 inmates in 60 prisons. In 2018,
the Directorate-General for Prisons and Detention Houses received 877 complaints alleging
torture and ill-treatment in prisons and detention centres. Legal and administrative action had
been taken against 543 personnel by December 2018. Prison monitoring boards, which were
dissolved following the attempted coup, were re-established with similar structures, and they
remain largely ineffective. There are also concerns related to the lack of access by civil
society organisations to prisons, despite the allegations of human rights violations. Given that
the national preventive mechanism is not fully operational, there is no oversight over human
rights abuses in prisons.
On the protection of personal data, the Personal Data Protection Authority (DPA) has
become operational and its Board has been appointed, but no legislative changes have taken
place to ensure that the law is harmonised with the EU acquis, in particular the EU General
Data Protection Regulation 2016/679 and Law Enforcement Directive 2016/680, which
entered into force in May 2018. This concerns inter alia the application of data protection in
law enforcement and the powers of the Data Protection Authority. Turkey has not signed or
ratified that 2018 Protocol amending the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with
regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (Council of Europe, CETS No 223).
On freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of worship continued to be
generally respected. The Venice Commission recommendations on the status of religious
communities in Turkey are yet to be implemented. This concerns in particular the right of the
Orthodox Patriarch to use the title ‘ecumenical’. Requests by different Christian communities
to open places of worship and curricula for clergy are still pending. Hate speech and hate
crimes against Christians and Jews continued to be reported (see below - Minorities). The
controversial use for marking religious celebrations of the Hagia Sophia, which is a museum
situated within a listed UNESCO world heritage site, continued to trigger reactions. One
Islamist foundation, which opposes the Government, was closed down, and its assets and
media outlets transferred to the Treasury. A comprehensive legal framework in line with

                                                31
 European standards needs to be put in place, and appropriate attention must be paid to
implementing the ECtHR judgments on compulsory religion and ethics classes, indication of
religious affiliation on identity cards and Alevi worship places. For example, in one Court
case, the mention of Zoroastrianism in the religion section of the defendant’s identity card
was seen as evidence of membership of an illegal organisation. Alevis held several
demonstrations and made a number of press statements concerning the lifting of the
compulsory religion course, and for an end to discriminatory attitude against Alevis in
education, employment and social life. The Turkish Government did not implement the action
plan, submitted in 2016 to the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers, relating to ECtHR
decisions on Cem Houses and on compulsory religion classes. School textbooks still need to
be revised in order to remove all discriminatory elements against all religions and faith
groups. No steps were taken to open the Halki (Heybeliada) Greek Orthodox Seminary. There
are concerns over the protocols signed between the Ministry of National Education and
religion-affiliated organisations over the delivery of educational tasks of the Ministry.
Through government policies, the work of the Religious Affairs Presidency (Diyanet)
increased in all spheres of public life.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Freedom of expression
Turkey is at an early stage in this area and the serious backsliding continued. The restrictive
measures adopted during and after the state of emergency were disproportionate in their
implementation and have negatively affected many opposition voices in the media, civil
society and academia. Exercise of the freedom of expression has been considerably
hampered. Legislation, especially provisions on national security and the fight against
terrorism, and its implementation, are diverging from the case law of the European Court of
Human Rights. Criminal cases against journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers, writers
and social media users continued. A decree law of July 2018 amending the duties and
authorities of the Directorate-General of Press and Information, which was originally
affiliated with the Prime Ministry, handed over authorisation to issue yellow press cards to
the Directorate of Communication linked to the Presidency of the Republic. Many EU
journalists faced delays in the renewal of their press accreditation.
No measures have been taken to address the damage incurred as a result of the closure of
numerous media outlets or the appointment by the Government of trustees to administer
them. The high number of arrests of journalists - over 160 journalists remain in prison - is of
very serious concern. The blocking and erasing of online content without a court order on an
inappropriately wide range of grounds, based on the Internet Law and the general legal
framework, continued. Judicial control of requests relating to content takedowns or the
blocking of content based on individual decisions by criminal judges of peace led to
concerns, due to the structure of these courts. An estimated 170 000 sites are reportedly
banned. A large number of media workers (journalists, engineers, sound and image
technicians, etc.) were laid off in 2016 (2 708), 2017 (166) and 2018 (175).
The Commission’s 2016 and 2018 recommendations were not followed up, and are therefore
restated in this report. In the coming year, Turkey should:
 release journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers, writers and academics being held in
  pre-trial detention; refrain from, and end, the practice exercised in various forms by both
  state and non-state agents of intimidating, interfering with and putting pressure on the
  media, ensuring a safe, plural and enabling environment for the media to carry out their
  work independently and without fear of reprisals;

                                                       32
  refrain from undue restrictions on freedom of expression, including in relation to anti-
  terrorism operations, in line with the Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the
  Council of Europe on protecting freedom of expression and information in times of crisis;
 ensure that existing legislation, in particular the Anti-Terror Law, the Criminal Code and
  the Internet Law, is revised to comply with European standards and is implemented in a
  manner which does not curtail freedom of expression and ensures proportionality and
  equality before the law;
 ensure that criminal law provisions, in particular articles on defamation and other similar
  offences, are not used as a means of putting pressure on critical voices, by ensuring that
  courts apply European Court of Human Rights case-law and are able to act independently.
Intimidation of journalists
Heavy pressure on the media continued as in previous years, with arrests, detentions,
prosecutions and dismissals of media staff. Censorship and self-censorship continued among
media workers. There were an estimated 160 journalists in prison in February 2019. Civil
society has documented threats and physical attacks on journalists and media organisations.
There is government interference in editorial independence, and pressure on media outlets to
fire journalists critical of the Government. The state has undertaken direct and indirect
takeover of, or the closure of, private media companies. There are restrictions on access to the
airwaves, and there have been fines and closures of TV and radio channels critical of the
Government.
The criminal justice system allowed journalists to be prosecuted and imprisoned on extensive
charges of terrorism, insulting public officials, and/or committing crimes against the state.
The right to a fair trial and the respect of the principle of the presumption of innocence were
not always ensured in political cases (see above - Judiciary). Indictments did not usually
establish a link with the alleged offence and, in some high-profile cases, the defence provided
by the defendants was not taken into consideration by the court. In many cases, the use of
confidential decisions impaired the access to justice and the right of defence, because the
charges against the suspects were communicated to them and their lawyers only when the
indictment was issued. In some cases, the indictment took more than a year to be issued. On
the other hand, details of prosecution files of journalists or members of civil society
organisations appeared in the mainstream media, which amplified smear campaigns against
them and violated the principle of the presumption of innocence.
Judicial cases against critical newspapers and their affiliated journalists continued. Eighteen
journalists from the Cumhuriyet newspaper were convicted in February 2018. A limited
number of other writers and journalists have belatedly been released pending trial. Several
court cases were subject to comments from the executive.
Legislative environment
No improvements took place concerning the legal framework and its implementation, which
guarantee the exercise of freedom of expression in the media and internet. Legislation on
anti-terrorism, on the internet and on intelligence services, and the Criminal Code, impede
freedom of expression and run counter to European standards. Criminal legislation still
allows prison sentences for insulting the President and senior politicians, and for insults to
religion. In addition to prison terms, high fines also have a deterrent effect on media
reporting, especially for grassroots media. Legislation on hate speech that is not in line with
ECtHR case law needs to be improved.


                                              33
 The Internet Law and the general legal framework enable the executive to block online
content without a court order on an inappropriately wide range of grounds. Following a
March 2018 amendment, the regulation of broadcasting performed by the Radio and
Television Supreme Council is applicable to any online media service providers and platform
operators, including those operating from abroad. The amendments also gave the Council the
power to impose bans on internet broadcasting.
A decree law also closed down the Prime Ministry Directorate-General of Press and
Information, which was authorised to issue press cards. This power has now been transferred
to the presidency. In December 2018, the new Press Cards Regulation was published. It
changed accreditation criteria, making state press cards harder to obtain and making it easier
to cancel them. In December 2018, official sources stated that the press cards of 1 954
journalists had been cancelled over the last three years. Many EU journalists faced long
delays for the renewal of their press cards. Some of them have seen their accreditation
refused without proper justification.
Implementation/institutions
Severe restriction of the freedoms of expression and media continued, including the
imprisonment of scores of journalists, the closure of media outlets, the criminalisation of
criticism of government policies or officials, and the blocking of websites and content. The
trend of prosecutions of journalists, writers, social media users and other members of the
public, even children, for insulting the President, has dramatically increased. Such cases often
end with prison sentences, suspended sentences or punitive fines. Similarly, a journalist has
been sentenced to jail for ‘defamation and insult’ because of her investigation into offshore
tax havens which revealed details of the business activities of the country’s former Prime
Minister and his sons. Criminal convictions based on press statements made by human rights
defenders continued.
Reporters without Borders, in its 2018 World Press Freedom Index, ranked Turkey 157 of
180 countries, down from 155 in last year’s index.
The Zaman case of journalists/writers concluded in July 2018, and all defendants were
acquitted of coup charges. Appeals in the case are pending. In October, Istanbul’s Appeal
Court upheld aggravated life sentences for six suspects, including the well-known writers and
intellectuals Nazlı Ilıcak, Ahmet Altan and Mehmet Altan, over links to the Gülen movement.
In late June 2018, Mehmet Altan was released under judicial control. It is worrying that
regional courts keep ignoring the judgments of the Constitutional Court and the ECtHR.
Indeed, in January 2018, the Constitutional Court had ruled that the rights to liberty and
freedom of expression of two of the above journalists had been violated, and that their
detention could not be considered a necessary and proportionate measure. The lower courts
rejected the release of the accused, claiming that the judgment of the Constitutional Court
was an ‘usurpation of authority’ and therefore could not be accepted.
In August 2018, the Istanbul Chief Prosecutor’s Office opened an investigation into actions
threatening ‘economic security’, while Turkey’s financial watchdog launched a separate
probe into what it described as ‘fake news’ aimed at manipulating the economy, thus creating
a chilling effect on disseminating news on the deteriorating economic situation. There was an
increase in investigations due to social media posts. The Offices of the Ankara and Istanbul
Chief Public Prosecutors launched investigations into ‘news items, printed and visual
publication, social media accounts that serve in economic attacks’ in August. The pressures
on Kurdish media and those reporting Kurdish issues continued through court cases,
detentions and arrests of journalists.


                                              34
 Court cases continued against ‘Academics for Peace’, who signed a declaration in January
2016 condemning the security operations in the south-east and calling for resumption of the
peace talks. Some of the cases ended in convictions on charges of ‘terrorist organisation
propaganda’, and the sentences were postponed, apart from two cases where the academics
refused postponement of sentences, one of them has been imprisoned in May. Cases against
university students on various freedom of expression-related charges also continued, with
concerns regarding the respect of ECtHR case law standards.
The increased use of harsh rhetoric against any form of critical voice by public officials,
including at the highest level, continued.
Regarding the internet, Twitter Transparency reported that over 1 464 tweets and 425
accounts were blocked, and 13 843 specific accounts were reported by the Turkish authorities
in the first half of 2018. Access to Wikipedia in Turkey, blocked since April 2017, has still
not been lifted. According to unofficial sources, some 244 000 websites have been banned,
only 2% of which were on the basis of a court decision.
Public service broadcasters
A Presidential decree restructured the public service broadcaster, TRT, and changes to the
monitoring rules were interpreted as taking away the right of the Radio and TV Supreme
Council (RTÜK) to monitor TRT broadcasts. Following the changeover to the executive
presidency, a presidential decree published on 24 July 2018 affiliated the Turkish Radio and
Television Corporation (TRT) with the Presidential Communication Authority and the RTÜK
with the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. The editorial policy of the public service
broadcaster TRT continued to display a significant pro-government line.
The Internet Law, and the draft provisions that further expand the powers of the RTÜK in
allocating licenses for online broadcasting, should be also revised in line with EU standards.
A state of emergency decree amended several articles of the TRT, and ruled that all
purchases, sales, services, consultancy fees, productions and transportation fees will be
exempt from the public procurement law. RTÜK’s independence and neutrality is subject to
criticism, as members continue to be elected by Parliament without input from civil society or
professional organisations. However, the current composition of the RTÜK does not reflect
Parliament, since the HDP is excluded (see Chapter 10 – Information Society and Media).
Under the state of emergency, RTÜK continued to take a number of channels off the air as
well as suspending and fining channels for broadcasting content that is ‘contrary to the
national and moral values of society, general morality and the principle of family protection’.
In September 2018, RTÜK approved a regulation which grants further authority to impose
extensive supervision and censorship on radio and television broadcasts made on the Internet.
During the electoral campaigns, the İYİ and CHP presidential candidates and all CHP
parliamentary candidates boycotted the TRT due to its alleged lack of impartiality.
Economic factors
The lack of transparency of media ownership continues to cast doubt on the independence of
editorial policies. Concentration in the media market increased sharply with the sale of the
Doğan holding to Demirören holding. The takeover of media outlets and the appointment of
trustees to control media groups have had a negative economic impact, with the loss of
hundreds of jobs. Emergency decrees led to the closure of a large number of media outlets. In
addition, according to journalists’ associations, the increase in paper prices led some media
outlets to stop publishing and some other local outlets to either decrease the number of
publications or close their supplements. As a result, unemployment among journalists
increased. The journalists’ organisations called for the Press Advertising Authority to review

                                              35
 its advertisement distribution policy. State-sponsored advertising is not fairly and
transparently distributed. This further distorts the market, and adds to the economic pressure
on some media outlets from major customers, including the state. Independent and
sustainable financing of the public service broadcaster is not ensured. Broadcasting law does
not ensure fair competition, as it does not prevent monopolisation.
Professional organisations and working conditions
The representation of journalists continues to be divided between the professional journalists’
associations and the pro-government union. Journalism in Turkey is an increasingly
precarious profession, with low wages, a high risk of judicial harassment and a lack of job
security. Working conditions, insufficient trade union rights and application of labour
legislation, difficulty in obtaining a press card and arbitrary accreditation decisions remain
major concerns.
(See also Chapter 10 - Information society and media)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There was further backsliding in the area of freedom of assembly and association, where
the legislation and its implementation are not in line with European standards and do not
abide by the Turkish Constitution. The applicable ECtHR case law on freedom of assembly
needs to be implemented without delay, and relevant national laws need to be revised
accordingly. The implementation of legislation resulting from the state of emergency
expanded the administration’s powers to limit the right to peaceful assembly. The ECtHR
decided in favour of the applicant in the Güler v. Turkey case where the applicant was given
an official warning for being absent from his job after attending the May Day celebrations in
2008. Another ECtHR judgment on İmret v. Turkey (no.2) is related to the Kurdish issue, and
calls for legal amendments to vague provisions defining a terrorism-related criminal activity,
in this case participation in public demonstrations, based on Articles 220 (7) and 314 of the
Criminal Code.
A regulation adopted in October 2018 which obliges associations to disclose all their
members to authorities is problematic, and is a violation of constitutional guarantees such as
freedom of association and the right to privacy. The budgets of the Turkish Union of Bar
Associations, the Turkish Medical Association and other such professional organisations
were included in the general ‘Single Treasury Institutional Account’ managed by the Ministry
of Treasury and Finance, which answers directly to the Presidency. This raises doubts about
how effectively these organisations can continue to function if their financial resources are
controlled by the executive. While a number of commemoration ceremonies and meetings
were allowed, many events and demonstrations relating to the Kurdish issue or organised by
the opposition groups were prohibited on security grounds. The unauthorised holding of such
demonstrations at times resulted in forceful dispersal by the police forces. Initiatives to mark
the ‘Armenian Genocide Commemoration Day’ suffered a setback for the first time in years,
as the request of Istanbul Governorship regarding the removal of the word ‘genocide’ from
the statements was rejected by the organisers, resulting in harsh police intervention. While a
large World Peace Day demonstration in Diyarbakır was allowed on 1 September, several
others were banned around Turkey. In August, after many years, the peaceful gatherings by
‘Saturday Mothers’ to protest the unidentified killings and missing persons dating back to
1990s were banned by the Ministry of Interior. In September 2018, 500 workers who stopped
working in the construction of the third airport in İstanbul on the grounds of bad working
conditions and over 30 fatal accidents were temporarily arrested, and are awaiting trial,
following police intervention using pepper gas. Trials for 62 workers are ongoing. Governors


                                                       36
 in several provinces have used wide-ranging state of emergency powers to ban events and
assemblies. The Ankara Governorate ban on all LGBTI activities imposed in November
2017, which has undermined the visibility of LGBTI communities and their ability to
exercise the right to peaceful assembly, ended in April 2019. An administrative court in
Ankara decided to lift the ban while an appeal had previously been rejected in November
2018. An increased number of penalties for participants in unauthorised events acted as
another constraint on the right to freedom of assembly and association.
Issues of labour and trade union rights are further covered in Chapter 19 - Social policy
and employment.
On property rights, the confiscations of the property of many institutions, companies or
private individuals under the state of emergency and beyond remain of serious concern. There
continues to be a lack of effective domestic remedy for confiscations, since the Inquiry
Commission on the State of Emergency Measures is slow to issue decisions and lacks
transparency. In the south-east, the authorities have started repairing damage in a number of
cities and towns. Regarding the implementation of the Law on Foundations, most of the
appeals regarding rejected claims for the restitution of property are pending either before a
local court or at the ECtHR. Some earlier favourable decisions, which have been challenged
by the Treasury, are also awaiting final judgment. Some judicial decisions on property rights
were reversed, to the detriment of minority foundations, such as the returning of the
Sanasaryan Inn back to the state. The case in relation to the ownership of the land of the
Syriac Orthodox Mor Gabriel Monastery is ongoing. The Council of Europe’s
recommendations on protecting property rights and education rights still need to be fully
implemented. Council of Europe Resolution 1625 (2008) regarding property rights on the
islands of Gökçeada (Imbros) and Bozcaada (Tenedos) needs to be fully implemented.
Relevant legislation on the issue of property rights of non-Muslim minorities and legislation
covering all issues of property rights still need to be revised.
The principle of non-discrimination is not sufficiently protected by law or enforced fully in
practice. The NHREI, which is in charge of applying anti-discrimination legislation, had only
finalised two decisions by March 2019. Hate crime legislation is not in line with international
standards, and does not cover hate offences based on sexual orientation. The introduction of
revised school textbooks in the 2017-18 academic year has raised questions about some
content with regard to secularism/religion and gender inequality. In April 2016, Turkey
signed the Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime, concerning the
criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer
systems, but ratification is still pending. Turkey should urgently adopt a law on combating
discrimination in line with the ECHR, including sexual orientation and identity. Turkey
should also ratify Protocol 12 of the Convention, which provides for the general prohibition
of discrimination, and implement the recommendations of the Council of Europe’s European
Commission against Racism and Intolerance.
Equality between women and men is in place in the legislative and institutional framework.
However, due to weak implementation of legislation and the low quality of support services
available, gender disparity still exists in areas such as decision-making, employment,
education and health. The Government has taken some positive steps to improve gender
equality, as stated in action plans on education, employment and violence. However, these
action plans have not been fully implemented, and lack systematic monitoring. There is a lack
of strong political commitment to gender equality: stereotyped views of gender roles,
including in the school textbooks and in the media, continue to pervade Turkish society and
foster the persistent low social status of women and violence against women. Further efforts

                                              37
 to educate women and men are necessary to prevent domestic violence. Gender-based
violence led to the death of 440 women, and only 317 women reported sexual violence in
2018. There are serious concerns that relate to early and forced marriages and discretionary
mitigation in court cases of violence against women, possibly mirroring sexist prejudice and
victim blaming. Closure of women’s associations and some centres after the state of
emergency caused additional challenges for women victims who lost support services.
There was little progress on the rights of the child. Challenges of child poverty, child labour,
and child marriage remain, as do gaps in access to quality inclusive education and protection
from violence and abuse, particularly for the most vulnerable groups, including Roma. The
2013-2017 national children’s rights strategy and action plan has not been renewed, and its
implementation is not being closely monitored. A national strategy to prevent violence
against children was in place until 2018, but has yet to be updated or renewed. Despite
reports of increased sexual abuse and ill-treatment of children, systematic monitoring and
research on these issues remain inadequate. All allegations of child abuse need to be
investigated swiftly, effectively and impartially. Juvenile courts are still not in place in all
provinces, despite the clear wording of the law. The quality of legal aid for juveniles, and
rehabilitation activities in prisons are a matter of concern. Closure by the authorities of
several civil society organisations dealing with juvenile rights after the state of emergency led
to a decrease in civil society support to victims.
On the rights of persons with disabilities, Turkey continued capacity-building efforts to
promote inclusive education services. However, the lack of qualified teaching staff for
inclusive education is a major obstacle. There is a particularly low rate of participation in
early childhood education. Affordable occupational therapy and vocational rehabilitation
services need to be expanded to promote the employability of persons with disabilities. The
Government continued its financial support scheme for home-based care provision for people
with disabilities in need. However, people with disabilities have limited access to the
personal and social support needed for independent living. Awareness on the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities (CPRD) among public service providers
is reportedly low, and no systematic efforts are made to promote or implement the principles
of the Convention. The National Monitoring and Evaluation Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities needs to be activated, and its work should be conducted in line with
the CRPD. The NHREI needs to step up efforts to address discrimination on the basis of
disability. According to the Criminal Code, the exclusion of a disabled person from public
service is not considered a crime, unless it is a hate crime. Legal sanctions against
discrimination in education and employment remain unidentified in Turkish Disability Act.
Accessibility Monitoring and Audit Commissions established at provincial level have not
been effective in promoting accessibility. Turkey has no mental health legislation and no
independent body to monitor mental health institutions. Turkey suffers from a lack of
reliable, up-to-date data on the situation of persons with disabilities.
There are serious concerns on the protection of the fundamental rights of lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons. No changes have been introduced to
the military disciplinary system or to medical regulations which define homosexuality as a
‘psychosexual disorder/illness’. A new law of January 2018 on disciplinary provisions for the
security forces stated that ‘abnormal/pervert’ actions were grounds for dismissal for all
security personnel. Activists have been sued for ‘participating in an unauthorised
demonstration’. LGBTI activities and Pride parades have been banned or stopped by police in
several provinces, among them Ankara, Adana and Istanbul. LGBTI activities can only be
carried out informally in closed spaces. In 2018, the Court of Cassation changed its 2015
positive jurisprudence on hate speech by stating that calling LGBTI persons ‘perverts’ is

                                               38
 freedom of expression. Hate speech by government officials and media against the LGBTI
community continued during the reporting period. Intimidation and violence against the
LGBTI community continues to be a major problem, and hate speech against LGBTI persons
is not effectively prosecuted, as it is mostly considered to fall within the boundaries of
freedom of speech. There is no specific legislation to address these crimes. There is limited
protection of LGBTI organisations which have received threats. Discrimination towards the
LGBTI community is still widespread.
No steps were taken to further align legislation with European standards on procedural
rights, some aspects of which are guaranteed by law, including legal aid and the right to
translation and interpretation in criminal matters. Turkey has been repeatedly criticised by the
ECtHR for violating the right to a fair trial, notably due to its failure to respect procedural
rules. Some prohibitions introduced by state of emergency decrees were lifted, but the
legislative amendments adopted in July amending several articles related to fundamental
freedoms was criticised for retaining many of the repressive powers of the state of
emergency. Accordingly, changes to anti-terror legislation allow maximum detention periods
before the detainee is brought before a judge (for release or formal arrest) of up to 12 days.
The ECHR standard is a maximum of 4 days. The ban on access to defence during the first 24
hours of police custody is still present in the Anti-Terror Law. Legal professionals are being
targeted with allegations of supporting a terrorist organisation. Twelve of 17 lawyers from a
Lawyers Association and a Law Bureau, who were released from prison in September 2018,
were re-arrested after the prosecutor’s objection in the same court, in the absence of new
evidence or developments. The evidence indicates that these allegations are a strategy to stop
the legitimate exercise of their professional duties, including human rights-related work. As
of January 2019, it is estimated that 1,546 lawyers have been prosecuted, including 274 who
have been convicted in first-instance courts of membership of a terrorist organisation. Law
officials (judges, prosecutors and other civil servants) suspended from the civil service by
state of emergency decrees are barred from acting as lawyers, since the Ministry of Justice's
appeals against their licences have so far always been accepted by the judiciary. Criticisms
persist of the complex and problematic structure of the legal aid system, as well as of the
quality of the services offered. However, a strategy plan accompanied by an action plan for
2018-2021 has been developed, with the aim of restructuring the system.
Hate speech and threats directed against minorities remain a serious problem. This includes
hate speech in the media targeting national, ethnic and religious groups. There has also been
increased anti-Semitic rhetoric in the media and by public officials due to the conflict in
Palestine. Furthermore, school textbooks need to be revised to delete remnants of
discriminatory references. Attacks or acts of vandalism on minority worship places continued
and need to be investigated. State subsidies for minority schools have also fallen
considerably. However, discussions between the Government and representatives of
minorities have continued. For example, President Erdoğan hosted the Ecumenical Greek
Orthodox Patriarch and discussed the Patriarch’s request for support for the protection and
restoration of the Greek orphanage on Istanbul’s Prinkipo (Büyükada) Island. On minority
foundations, no new regulation on the election procedures for non-Muslim foundations has
been published since 2013. In the absence of a regulation, these foundations are unable to
hold elections for their board members. The Armenian Patriarchal election procedures were
halted by the Istanbul Governorate. Regarding minorities, full respect for and protection of
language, religion, culture and fundamental rights in accordance with European standards
have yet to be fully achieved. The issue of property rights of non-Muslim minorities and the
need for a revision of legislation covering all issues regarding property rights is pending. As
the Venice Commission underlined in 2010, Turkey should continue the reform process and

                                              39
 introduce legislation which makes it possible for all non-Muslim religious communities as
such to acquire legal personality.
Implementation of the national strategy (2016-2021) for Roma citizens needs to be stepped
up, with sufficient budget allocation, especially after the end of the SIROMA IPA project.
There is still a lack of solid data allowing for evidence-based policy, measureable indicators
and time-bound targets. Adoption and implementation of a new action plan is urgently
required following the end of the previous one covering 2016-2018. Local authorities need to
be properly involved for effective implementation of the strategy, and adopt local
strategies/action plans when relevant. The monitoring committee of the strategy needs to be
strengthened and have more regular meetings. A broader group of Roma NGOs should be
included in the Committee. Following the June parliamentary election, there are now two
Roma MPs. Roma in general live in very poor housing conditions, often lack basic public
services and are reliant on benefits. Urban renewal projects continue to primarily affect Roma
settlements, forcibly displacing families. In the field of education, Roma children experience
additional challenges in accessing quality education, and schools in Roma neighbourhoods
are often poorly resourced. Inadequate access to education and high drop-out rates persist,
especially at lower and upper secondary levels. Participation in pre-primary education
remains very low. It is difficult for Roma citizens to find long-term formal employment. The
employment rate of Roma citizens is around 31 percent. A coordinated and rights-based
public service delivery approach at district level, as piloted by the IPA funded SIROMA
project, needs to be disseminated. The first EU-Turkey Joint Roma Seminar did not take
place in 2018 as initially planned.
On cultural rights, the Government has not legalised the provision of public services in
languages other than Turkish. Legal restrictions on mother-tongue education in primary and
secondary schools remain. Optional courses in Kurdish continue in public state schools, as do
university programmes in Kurdish, Arabic, Syriac and Zaza. Particular restrictions exist on
Kurdish language and literature: there are reports about the dismissal of Kurdish academics
and lecturers, partly facing terrorism-related investigations, the closure of Kurdish language
NGOs and institutions, pressure on Kurdish media, and bans on Kurdish books (see Chapter
10 – Information society and media). In the south-east, several commemorative and literary
monuments marking Kurdish personalities, as well as events and bilingual street signs, were
removed by appointed trustees and authorities. The State Theatres, Opera and Ballet were re-
established by presidential decree in July 2018. It remains to be seen whether the new
presidential board for cultural and artistic policies will allow autonomy to cultural
institutions.
2.2.2.   Chapter 24: Justice, freedom and security
The EU has common rules for border control, visas, external migration and asylum.
Schengen cooperation entails the lifting of border controls inside the EU. There is also
cooperation in the fight against organised crime and terrorism, and judicial, police and
customs cooperation.
Turkey is moderately prepared in justice, freedom and security. There has been some
progress in the past year, in particular in migration and asylum policy. Turkey continued to
make significant efforts in hosting and addressing the needs of almost four million refugees,
and in preventing illegal crossings towards the EU. Turkey remained committed to
implementing the March 2016 EU-Turkey Statement and played a key role in ensuring
effective management of migratory flows along the Eastern Mediterranean route. There has
been limited progress in the implementation of the recommendations of last year’s report.
Turkey is not yet implementing the provisions relating to third-country nationals in the EU-

                                             40
 Turkey readmission agreement, despite these entering into force in October 2017. Turkey still
needs to align its legislation on data protection to allow for police and judicial cooperation
with Europol and Eurojust, as well as on border management and on the fight against
terrorism. Most of the recommendations can be repeated, therefore.
For the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 continue implementing the EU-Turkey Statement of March 2016 and implement all the
  provisions of the EU-Turkey readmission agreement towards all EU Member States;
 align legislation on personal data protection with European standards, and implement the
  necessary requirements for the negotiation of an international agreement allowing for the
  exchange of personal data with Europol and Eurojust;
 revise its legislation and practices on terrorism in line with the European Convention on
  Human Rights, European Court of Human Rights case law and the EU acquis and
  practices. The proportionality principle must be observed in practice.
Fight against organised crime
Turkey has some level of preparation in the fight against organised crime. There has been
limited progress overall, and no progress in meeting last year’s recommendations, which can
be largely repeated. Turkey should continue to take measures to improve its track record on
dismantling criminal networks and confiscating criminal assets. Turkey also needs to improve
its legislation on cybercrime, asset confiscation and witness protection. Two rounds of
negotiations took place on an international agreement on the exchange of personal data
between Europol and the Turkish authorities. However, the Turkish data protection law is not
yet in line with the European standards.
For the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 establish an Asset Recovery Office in line with the EU acquis;
 collect and use appropriate aggregate statistics to facilitate threat assessment, policy
  development and implementation;
 enhance cooperation with Europol;
 adopt the 2019-2021 action plan for the implementation of the strategy for combatting
  organised crime;
 develop a strategic approach towards financial investigations, including by adopting the
  Financial Action Task Force concept of financial investigations; implementing financial
  investigations as a standard when dealing with organised crime, terrorism and serious
  corruption cases; launching financial investigations from the very start of a criminal
  investigation; applying a multidisciplinary cooperation and a pro-active approach with
  regard to financial investigations; and developing a legal framework for the confiscation
  of proceeds of crime.
Institutional set-up and legal alignment
Pursuant to the main law on enforcement institutions relevant in the fight against organised
crime, i.e. the Gendarmerie and the Turkish National Police under the Ministry of Interior,
the number of specialised departments dealing with specific forms of organised crime (e.g.
drugs, irregular migration, human trafficking, cybercrime, witness protection) has further
increased.

                                             41
 Turkey has not yet established or designated an Asset Recovery Office in charge of the
identification and tracing of criminal assets.
The Cyber Security Council was abolished and the President of the Republic was authorised
to designate a board or an authority to fulfil the duties of the Council. The repercussions of
this recent change remain to be seen.
Turkey’s legal framework for the fight against organised crime and police cooperation is
partially aligned with the EU acquis. The scope of witness protection needs to be expanded to
include all types of serious crime, while its procedural rules also need improvement.
Extended confiscation, third-party confiscation, and precautionary freezing of assets need to
be aligned with the acquis.
The Ministry of Interior continues to coordinate implementation of the 2016-21 strategy for
combating organised crime. An action plan for the implementation of this strategy covering
2019-21 is under preparation. Turkey is implementing a number of sectoral strategies and
action plans, such as a national cybersecurity strategy and action plan for 2016-19.
Implementation and enforcement capacity
In the fight against organised crime, 1 118 persons were arrested in 417 operations in 2018
compared with 685 persons arrested in 274 operations in 2017. In 2018, in 972 cases of
organised crime, 1 774 persons were convicted.
In the fight against smuggling (fuel, cigarettes, historical works, commodities etc.), in 2018,
569 suspects were arrested out of 20 187 persons in 13,047 incidents. In 2017, 558 suspects
were arrested out of 20 033 persons in 14 009 incidents, and in 2016, 434 suspects were
arrested out of 15 933 persons in 10,157 incidents.
The measures taken after the attempted coup of July 2016 continued to affect the operational
capacity of the forces of public order. In 2018, 192 personnel (officers, non-commissioned
officers, civil servants) from the Coast Guard Command were dismissed (128 in 2017). In
2018, 689 personnel (officers, non-commissioned officers) from the Turkish Jandarma
(gendarmerie) were dismissed (1 533 in 2017). 2 204 new personnel were recruited in 2017
and 2018. The capacity of the training academy has been stretched to meet the increasing
number of training courses required.
As regards international cooperation, the first round of negotiations took place in November
2018 for an international agreement on the exchange of personal data between Europol and
the Turkish authorities competent in fighting serious crime and terrorism. The second round
took place in April 2019. The Turkish data protection law is not yet in line with European
standards, something which is a central requirement for concluding the agreement. A
strategic agreement with Europol has been in force since 2004, while a Turkish liaison officer
has been seconded to Europol since 2016. Closer cooperation between Turkish law
enforcement and Europol can be achieved by making better use of the existing strategic
cooperation agreement and liaison agreement.
Turkey continues to cooperate with 22 Member States, with 47 signed cooperation
agreements to fight against terrorism and crime via information sharing and joint operations.
Overall, Turkey has 172 security cooperation agreements with 103 countries.
The number of suspicious transaction reports submitted to the Financial Crimes Investigation
Board in 2018 grew to 222 743, compared to 176 411 in 2017 and 132 750 in 2016. The
number of files analysed and evaluated by the Financial Crimes Investigation Board is
showing an upward trend, increasing from 23 893 during the reporting period, compared with
10 554 in 2017.

                                              42
 As regards domestic operational capacity, the courts’ need of expertise in organised crime
cases continues. Cooperation between law enforcement bodies on organised crime should be
improved, in particular that between the police and the gendarmerie. In terms of equipment,
law enforcement bodies have appropriate modern vehicles, radio communication systems,
software, hardware and premises. Most of the required databases are in place, though they are
not always interconnected. Cooperation between the Police Academy of Turkey and the
European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training (CEPOL) has continued.
In line with EU acquis, the confiscation of criminal assets should be a priority in the fight
against organised crime, terrorism and corruption in Turkey. Turkey should develop and
implement a more comprehensive and coherent legal framework for the confiscation of the
proceeds of crime. In addition, it is crucial that financial investigations into a person’s assets
are allowed to continue (for years if needed) after a criminal conviction in order to fully and
effectively implement a previously issued confiscation order. Finally, Turkey should urgently
improve its capacity to manage frozen or confiscated assets so that they do not lose economic
value (asset management).
The number of people convicted for money laundering was 9 in 2018, unchanged from
2017. During the reporting period, the Turkish Coast Guard Command was involved in 13
drug-related incidents in 2018, ten of which were carried out with other law enforcement
agencies; they led to 39 suspects being taken into custody. Turkish law enforcement
authorities detained 24 809 suspects in connection with drug-related crimes, which resulted in
8 237 convictions.
Turkey is a destination and a transit country, and to a lesser extent a source country, for
women, men and children subjected to trafficking in human beings for sexual and labour
exploitation. Authorities reported 134 victims of trafficking in human beings until 31
December 2018, compared with 303 in 2017. The main shortcomings identified are the lack
of shelters (there are currently only two with a total hosting capacity for 42 victims), access
to shelters for men (labour exploitation), victim identification, legal assistance to victims, and
a referral system that involves civil society organisations.
Turkey has strong standards preventing the sale of blank-firing, gas and alarm weapons that
can be converted into live-firing guns. However, these standards do not apply to the
manufacture of such weapons for export. Consequently, Turkey is a major exporter to the EU
of blank-firing, gas and alarm weapons, which do not comply with EU standards and are one
of the main current sources of firearms trafficking.
Pro-actively fighting organised crime and corruption remains fundamental to countering the
illicit influence of criminal groups on the political, legal and economic systems.
Cooperation in the field of drugs
Institutional set-up and legal alignment
Drug policies are the responsibility of the High Council for the Fight against Drugs, which is
responsible for inter-institutional coordination and monitoring in this area. The High Council
includes ministers from all of the ministries involved in delivering the objectives of this
strategy. The Board for the Fight against Drugs supports the work of the High Council, and
the Ministry of Health carries out the secretariat functions. There is a research committee
conducting research on drug addiction and new types of addiction, which aims to identify
reasons for addiction and measures to be taken to address the issue. There is also a scientific
committee, composed of academics, which is tasked with making scientific recommendations
for studies and carrying out training on drug abuse. This committee is established within the


                                               43
 Turkish Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. The National Early Warning
System for control procedures is managed by the same centre of the Turkish National Police.
A national anti-drug strategy for 2018-2023 was adopted in May 2018. In July 2017, the
Ministry of Interior had adopted its own institutional plan to implement specific projects in
this field. The implementation policy on the fight against drugs (2017-2018) was updated
during the reporting period.
Implementation and enforcement capacity
Turkey remains a transit route for drugs between Asia and Europe. Turkish law-enforcement
bodies conducted successful operations during the reporting period which resulted in the
seizure of 175 714 kg of cannabis, 1 476 kg of cocaine, 17 752 kg of heroin, 8 605 662
ecstasy tablets and 26 271 790 captagon tablets. Joint controlled delivery operations and
judicial cooperation also continued involving the Germany, the Netherlands, the UAE, Italy,
Bulgaria, Austria, the UK, Iran, Spain and the USA.
Since 2008, a total of 718 new psychoactive substances have been included in the scope of
the legislation as a result of the activities of the National Early Warning System for the
control procedures of the Turkish National Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
working group. The number of sniffer dogs used by the Turkish National Police has increased
to 431 from 391 over the past year.
Narcotics teams specialised in fighting against drugs operate now in all 81 provinces, to focus
especially on high-risk locations such as schools. This is the result of a constant increase in
number of provinces covered: 11 in 2015, 29 in 2016, and 50 in 2017.
Turkey continues to report annually to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug
Addiction (EMCDDA). The quality and quantity of data Turkey provides has been improving
in recent years. Rehabilitation and treatment capacity in the country needs to be further
increased, despite the increase in the number of treatment centres. Turkey’s capacity for data
collection and analysis is being strengthened through projects funded under IPA.
Fight against terrorism
Turkish efforts to tackle terrorism resulted in improvement of the security climate in the
country. Turkey is still facing threats from terrorist groups. The EU has condemned all acts of
terrorist violence. Measures taken in the fight against terrorism need to be proportionate.
While the Government has a legitimate right and responsibility to fight terrorism, it is also
responsible for ensuring that these efforts are done in accordance with the rule of law, human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Amending the anti-terror law and practices in line with EU
standards is key. This is also a remaining benchmark in the visa-liberalisation dialogue.
In its efforts to fight terrorism, Turkish threat perception has prioritised the fight against the
PKK and the dismantling of the Gülen movement, nationally designated as a terror
organisation in May 2016, and to which Turkey attributes the organisation and execution of
the attempted coup of July 2016. The PKK remains on the EU’s list of persons, groups and
entities involved in acts of terrorism. Turkey continued its efforts to fight against both
home-grown and foreign terrorist fighter (FTF) cells. Following the jointly agreed actions at
the counter-terrorism dialogue in November 2017, cooperation between Turkey and EU
Member States on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters has improved; there is a strong need
to continue to implement the actions that were agreed.




                                               44
 Institutional set-up and legal alignment
There is a Police tactical unit responsible for counter-terror in the Branch of the General
Directorate of Security.
Turkey has not made any progress in reforming its legislative framework on anti-terrorism
in the reporting period. While maintaining the effectiveness of its fight against terrorist
threats, Turkey needs to bring its legislation on terrorism and corresponding implementation
into line with the standards enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights, the case
law of the European Court of Human Rights and the EU acquis and practices.
The country is party to the Council of Europe’s Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure
and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism. The country
currently lacks a comprehensive strategy and action plan on anti-money laundering and
terrorism financing. However, the Financial Crimes Investigation Board (MASAK), in
coordination with other relevant institutions, has been preparing a comprehensive national
risk assessment document ahead of the upcoming Financial Action Task Force assessment in
2019.
Implementation and enforcement capacity
Turkey’s counter-terrorism dialogue with the EU continued, and is among the key areas of
joint interest. Turkey developed its cooperation with EU Member States on detecting foreign
terrorist fighters (FTF) who seek to cross Turkey to reach - or return from - Syria or Iraq.
Closer cooperation with Europol on FTF would be desirable. By 2018, Turkey issued entry
bans for more than 70,000 suspected FTF (14% of whom are EU citizens) and deported about
6 969 FTF (917 EU nationals). However, police and judicial cooperation with EU Member
States and EU agencies in combating terrorism remained limited due to the absence of a
personal data protection law in line with European standards, and differences over the
definition of, and penalties for, terrorist offences. Turkey should continue its efforts to
effectively prevent and counter radicalisation.
Legal and irregular migration
Institutional set-up and legal alignment
As regards the institutional framework, the Security and Foreign Policies Council is one of
the nine new Presidential Councils established by presidential decree in July 2018. The
Migration Board, established by presidential decree in September 2018, is responsible for the
determination, coordination and implementation of Turkey’s migration strategy and is
convened by the Minister of the Interior.
A decree of July 2018 resulted in the abolition of the following institutions: the Migration
Policy Board, previously established under the Law on Foreigners and International
Protection (LFIP), the Migration Advisory Board, which organised participation by civil
society and academia, and the Coordination Board on Combatting Irregular Migration. A
presidential decree which came into force in July 2018 established a new department under
the Directorate-General for Migration Management (DGMM), the Department for
Combatting Irregular Migration.
The DGMM remains a key player in managing migration and continued to increase its staff
capacity, and employs a total of 3 098 staff centrally and in the Turkish provinces. While no
DGMM structure abroad has yet been set up, the DGMM has appointed contact points to
Afghanistan and Pakistan, the main countries of origin of irregular migration to Turkey.
The legislation in this area is partially aligned with the EU acquis.

                                               45
 Turkey did not sign any additional bilateral readmission agreements in 2018. The
readmission agreement with Nigeria was ratified.
The DGMM follows a strategic plan for 2017-21, which contains objectives for regular
migration, irregular migration, international protection, the fight against trafficking in human
beings, improved integration and communication, and increased institutional capacity.
Implementation and enforcement capacity
The EU-Turkey Statement of 18 March 2016 after three years of implementation continued to
deliver results, with both parties committed to its effective implementation. According to the
International Organisation for Migration, the number of lives lost in the Aegean Sea during
irregular crossing attempts stood at 156 in 2018, compared with 62 in 2017 and 434 in 2016.
The daily average of irregular crossings from Turkey to the Aegean islands was 85 from the
activation of the Statement until the end of 2018, compared with 1 794 before the activation
of the Statement. This sharp downward trend was supported by intensified efforts by
Turkey’s law enforcement agencies to prevent irregular departures from coastal areas, by
Turkish Coast Guard rescue operations in the Aegean Sea, by the restriction of the free
movement of persons seeking international protection and by a measure relocating persons
under temporary protection who tried to cross irregularly to Europe to temporary
accommodation centres in eastern provinces of Turkey. Technical cooperation between
Greece and Turkey on returns under the Statement has been facilitated by regular trilateral
meetings also involving the EU. At the same time, migratory pressure on Turkey increased
significantly. According to the Turkish authorities, 222 290 persons who had crossed into
Turkey illegally were apprehended in 2018, compared with 175 752 in 2017. Irregular
migrants from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Syria were the three most frequently apprehended
nationalities. The number of irregular migrants intercepted by the coast guard reached 23 185
in the reporting period, up from 21 937 in 2017. The number of people smugglers
apprehended increased slightly from 4 641 in 2017 to 4 913 in 2018. No data is available
concerning their prosecution by the Turkish judicial system.
Turkey continued to implement the ‘One-for-One’ resettlement scheme under the EU-Turkey
Statement, in cooperation with the EU Member States and relevant UN agencies in Turkey.
Between April 2016 and December 2018, 18 640 Syrians were resettled from Turkey to the
EU, of whom nearly 7 000 in 2018. Respecting its commitments under the EU-Turkey
Statement since April 2016, in 2018 Turkey accepted 1 762 returnees from the Greek islands,
including 278 Syrians. The number of returns is low and needs to be increased.
Turkey has 18 removal centres with a total capacity of 8 276 persons. An additional
temporary facility for 4 000 persons was opened in 2018. The DGMM plans to increase its
hosting capacity by opening another 16 removal centres for up to 7 200 persons by 2020.
Turkey needs to further align its practice with European standards in removal centres, in
particular with regard to access to legal counselling and interpreters.
49 523 irregular migrants were returned from Turkey to their countries of origin in 2018.
Through an IPA-financed project implemented with IOM, 1 737 irregular migrants received
voluntary return assistance. Turkey is working on developing a national mechanism for
Assisted Voluntary Return.
Implementation of the EU-Turkey readmission agreement remained unsatisfactory.
Provisions of the agreement that apply to Turkish nationals are not implemented consistently
by all Turkish diplomatic missions in the EU. In relation to third-country nationals, Turkey
maintained its position that it would not implement the provisions that entered into force in
October 2017 until the visa requirement for Turkish citizens travelling to the Schengen zone

                                              46
 for a short stay has been lifted. Turkey has suspended and therefore is not implementing the
bilateral protocol on readmission with Greece (at the end of 2018 there were over 3 500
unanswered requests). Turkey does not readmit third-country nationals from Bulgaria under
either the bilateral border agreement or the EU-Turkey readmission agreement.
Asylum
Institutional set-up and legal alignment
The DGMM is the main institution responsible for all refugee-related issues. The dual
asylum registration and refugee status determination system established by the DGMM and
the UNHCR was abolished in September 2018. Since then, registration and refugee status
determination for non-Syrians in Turkey has been exclusively managed by the DGMM. In
March 2018, the DGMM opened a pilot Refugee Status Determination (RSD) centre in
Ankara. Another one is scheduled to start operations in Istanbul in 2019. The basic aim of
this initiative is to further harmonise RSD procedures in Turkey. The DGMM now issues ID
cards for applicants with an immediate validity of six months once their registration has been
completed. An ID card legalises an applicant’s stay in Turkey and provides access to the
national health insurance scheme, public schools, free interpretation services and other social
assistance. In some Provincial Directorates for Migration Management (PDMM), there are
backlogs and long waiting times for registering for international protection status.
International Protection applicants face serious difficulties in accessing registration and
obtaining IDs.
Applicants for international protection, conditional refugee status holders and people under
temporary protection (Syrians) can apply for work permits. According to the Turkish
authorities, the number of work permits issued to Syrians under temporary protection was
38 289 at the end of 2018, compared with 15 700 in 2017. This increase is attributed to the
information activities carried out by the Government to encourage legal employment, and to a
reduction in the administrative fees for work permits. Throughout 2018, the DGMM
continued the verification of data of Syrians under temporary protection, updating and
completing the information taken during their original registration. As of 31 December 2018,
the data of 2.6 million Syrians had been verified.
Legislation in this area is partially aligned with the EU acquis. The Turkish Law on
Foreigners and International Protection (LFIP) maintains the reservation (geographical
limitation) expressed in the New York Protocol of the 1951 Geneva Convention, according to
which the vast majority of persons seeking international protection in Turkey cannot apply
for fully-fledged refugee status but for ‘conditional refugee’ status and subsidiary protection
only. Conditional refugee status limits the stay in the country ‘until the moment a recognised
conditional refugee is resettled to a third country’. Syrian refugees are collectively granted a
specific refugee status under the Temporary Protection Regulation.
The DGMM drafted a strategy and action plan on ‘harmonisation’ (the term used by the
Turkish authorities to define activities related to the integration of migrants and refugees)
covering 2019-2023, which contains objectives for employment, health, education, social
policies, orientation/information, and social aid. The plan was endorsed by the former
Migration Policies Board in February 2018, but has not yet been made public.
Implementation and enforcement capacity
Turkey has continued to provide generous assistance to refugees, hosting the largest refugee
community in the world, with 3.6 million Syrians under Temporary Protection and around
370,000 registered non-Syrian refugees. The number of asylum seekers continued to increase
over the reporting period. In 2018, Turkey had granted international protection (refugee

                                              47
 status, conditional refugee status or subsidiary protection) to 72 056 applicants. The
authorities rejected 13 139 applications. The UNHCR indicates that at the end of December
2018, 370 932 asylum seekers and refugees from countries other than Syria were registered in
Turkey; of these, 46% were Afghanis and 39% were Iraqis.
There are currently 62 ‘satellite cities’ in Turkey where asylum seekers and recognised
conditional refugees are required to reside. Syrians may register in any of Turkey’s 81
provinces, but must then stay in that province. Registration was temporarily suspended in
some provinces during 2018.
Around 155 000 of 3.6 million Syrian refugees live in 13 camps located in the south-east of
the country, close to the Syrian border. The number of camps is steadily decreasing as
refugees are resettled to urban areas or return to their home countries. In 2018, the DGMM
took over the management of the camps from Turkey's Disaster and Emergency Management
Agency. Throughout 2018, significant steps were taken to provide wider access to schooling
and healthcare to Syrians under temporary protection, including with EU support under the
Facility for Refugees in Turkey.
The Facility is implemented as humanitarian and development assistance. Under the first
tranche of humanitarian assistance, 45 projects were contracted with 19 partners, covering
basic needs, protection, education and health. The EU addressed the needs of particularly
vulnerable refugees via the Emergency Social Safety Net, benefitting more than 1.6 million
of the most vulnerable refugees. The Conditional Cash Transfer for Education programme
was launched in 2017 and is the largest ever Education in Emergencies programme financed
by the EU, facilitating access for refugee populations to formal education systems. As of
April 2019, over 494 000 children attended school and their families received financial
support through this programme.
In education, a grant of EUR 300 million, implemented in cooperation with the Turkish
Ministry of National Education, has supported the integration of Syrian children into the
Turkish education system, thus providing access to education to over 600 000 children. This
support continues under the second tranche, and a new project with the Ministry of National
Education was signed, worth EUR 400 million. In addition, in health, the Facility is
delivering EUR 300 million in aid to ensure that refugees can access healthcare services, with
over 4 million primary health care consultations carried out and over 500 000 Syrian refugee
children vaccinated so far. Furthermore, 143 migrant health centres are now operational, with
over 2 000 staff employed.
Throughout 2018, the DGMM continued the verification of data of Syrians under temporary
protection, updating and completing the information taken during their original registration.
By December 2018, the data of 2.6 million Syrians had been verified using Facility funding.
This will provide updated data to design evidence-based programmes for targeted assistance,
and should be made available to policymakers across relevant government bodies. Reports in
the press of alleged expulsions, returns and deportations of Syrian nationals, in violation of
the principle of non-refoulement, continued in 2018. The EU monitors the situation of
refugees and migrants in Turkey through regular meetings and information exchange with
Turkish authorities, as well as national and international organisations, including these
focusing on refugee and migrant rights, and through field visits in crucial geographical areas.
However, the EU does not have access to the Turkish-Syrian border and is not monitoring
returns to Syria. The EU provides significant funding for capacity building of DGMM.
In June 2018, the Turkish Constitutional Court issued a pilot judgement concerning the
prohibition of refoulement in light of the amendments introduced to the LFIP by way of an


                                              48
 emergency decree in October 2016. The exception introduced to the principle of
non-refoulement provides that a deportation decision ‘may be taken at any time during the
international protection proceedings’ against a person for reasons of (i) leadership,
membership of or support of a terrorist organisation, or a benefit-oriented criminal group; (ii)
a threat to public order or public health; or (iii) in relation to terrorist organisations defined by
international institutions and organisations. This exception has been subjected to frequent
criticism by civil society organisations, since it allows for deportation while the asylum
procedure is still pending. The Constitutional Court has granted interim measures, deciding to
suspend deportation decisions in 784 out of 866 applications.
At the end of 2018, out of a total of 526 846 persons registered as eligible to apply for
international protection in Turkey (not including nationals eligible for the Temporary
protection status), the Turkish authorities had issued 72 961 positive decisions and 13 942
negative decisions, and still had to process a backlog of 317 062 applications.
The pilot centre for refugee status determination established in March 2018 in Ankara to
accelerate asylum processing is staffed with a number of caseworkers and designed as a
long-term support mechanism. Provincial Directorates for Migration Management may refer
asylum applicants to the centre in the event of a sudden increase in the number of applicants.
Decisions issued by the RSD centre are not final, and the final decision on granting status still
belongs to the governorate where the application is lodged. Interpretation is available, also
partly through EU support; however, it is not sufficient and needs to be further expanded.
GöçNet is the government database containing data on applicants for international protection,
including biometric data in the form of photos and fingerprints. Access to GöçNet by all law
enforcement agencies dealing with foreigners has not yet been ensured, although border
guards have access to it. There are only two reception and accommodation centres for asylum
seekers, set up in Yozgat and Tekird, with a total reception capacity of 150 people.
The DGMM continued to cooperate with the European Asylum Support Office in 2018.
Visa policy
The EU-Turkey visa liberalisation dialogue continued. Turkey established seven working
groups to carry out technical work on the outstanding benchmarks of the visa liberalisation
dialogue, namely the fight against corruption, judicial cooperation in criminal matters,
cooperation with Europol, data protection legislation, anti-terrorism legislation, the
EU-Turkey readmission agreement and biometric passports. Significant progress was made
regarding biometric passports, as the Directorate-General for Civil Registry and Citizenship
started issuing second-generation biometric passports for Turkish citizens in April 2018.
These biometric passports are now compatible with EU standards. In November, the EU and
Turkey launched negotiations on an agreement on the exchange of personal data between
Europol and the Turkish authorities but Turkey has yet to revise its data protection
legislation.
No progress has been made in the harmonisation of the Turkish visa policy with the EU visa
policy. Turkey should take further steps to ensure full alignment with the EU visa policy.
Turkey continues to apply a discriminatory visa regime towards 11 Member States.
Schengen and external borders
Institutional set-up and legal alignment
Legislation to create a single civil agency in charge of border security was put on hold,
mainly due to security concerns in several border regions. Cooperation between the different
agencies involved in border management matters is formally coordinated by the

                                                 49
 Directorate-General for Provincial Administration under the Ministry of Interior. However,
coordination remains weak, not least since the number of civil executive bodies and law
enforcement agencies dealing with border management issues is relatively high, and is
organised in a decentralised manner (in border regions in particular). A National
Coordination and Joint Risk Analysis Centre was established in 2016 with the aim of
providing a platform for collecting, exchanging and processing data on border security and
carrying out joint risk analysis among the different border authorities. The centre has not yet
become fully operational.
While Turkey’s legislation on external borders and Schengen is inspired by the EU acquis
and practices, its legislative and administrative frameworks are not fully aligned with EU
standards. In order to bring the country’s border management system more into line with the
EU acquis, Turkey should adopt a law on integrated border management (IBM) and intensify
its efforts to set up a civilian and professional border security agency which is specialised in
border checks of persons at border crossing points and in border surveillance at land and sea
borders. During the course of 2018, no new legislation on border management was adopted.
Since 2012, Turkey has a Memorandum of Understanding with the European Border and
Coast Guard Agency. During the reporting period, Turkey participated in joint operations as
an observer.
The entire Syrian border is protected by a wall or barbed wire fence. Several border
checkpoints remain open for regular trade and border crossings. These construction works
also aim to facilitate the removal of anti-personnel landmines laid 60 to 70 years ago.
Implementation and enforcement capacity
The Government continued to build up its mobile border surveillance capacity at land and sea
borders during the reporting period. New technologies were rolled out and the infrastructure
modernised. The greater influx of migrants and increased numbers of operations by the
different border services during 2018 have resulted in an increased number of apprehensions
of irregular migrants and organisers of people smuggling in 2018 (see figures in the section
Legal and Irregular Migration above). Demining activities with the financial support of the
EU were carried out during the reporting period in the province of Ağrı (near Doğubeyazıt) at
Turkey’s border with Iran. Turkey continued its border cooperation with neighbouring
Greece and Bulgaria through the trilateral Police and Customs Co-operation Centre by
dispatching liaison officers who are permanently based at the Bulgarian border crossing point
Kapitan Andreevo.
Judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters
Judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters is regulated by the Law on International
Civil Law and Procedural Law, circulars and international conventions. Turkey is a party to
most of these.
Turkey still needs to accede to relevant international conventions in the area of civil justice,
many of which were drawn up by the Hague Conference on Private International Law,
including in particular the Hague Convention of 30 June 2005 on Choice of Court
Agreements. Turkey has not yet ratified the European Convention on the Compensation of
Victims. Turkey should take effective measures to ensure an acceptable reduction in delays to
proceedings resulting from the 1980 Hague Convention on civil aspects of international child
abduction and to foster the use of international mediation in such cases.
Turkey now has in place the main legislation governing the judicial cooperation in criminal
matters and has acceded to most of the international conventions. In 2018, Turkey signed a

                                              50
 Protocol Amending the Additional Protocol to the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced
Persons. The implementation of the newly introduced mechanisms aim to speed up the
cooperation under the Law on international judicial cooperation in criminal matters of 2016.
It has started to yield positive results. However, the independence and accountability of the
justice system has to be substantially strengthened for a smooth application of the principle of
mutual recognition of judgements and court decisions in criminal matters.
In 2018, EU Member States accepted 7 extradition requests from Turkey while Turkey did
not accept any of the 5 requests from EU Member States. EU Member States did not accept
any transfer of convicts to Turkey and neither did Turkey. Turkey still does not cooperate
with all EU Member States in these matters.
In 2018, Eurojust dealt with 12 cases involving Turkey.
All aspects of customs cooperation are now covered under Chapter 29 – Customs Union.

3.       FUNDAMENTALS FIRST: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND COMPETITIVENESS




Source: Eurostat and national sources
In line with the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, EU
accession requires the existence of a functioning market economy and the capacity to cope
with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union.
Economic governance has become even more central in the accession process in recent
years. The Commission's monitoring takes place in two processes: the Economic Reform
Programme exercise and the assessment of compliance with the economic criteria for
accession. Each enlargement country prepares an annual Economic Reform Programme
(ERP), which sets out a medium-term macro-fiscal policy framework and a structural reform
agenda aimed at ensuring competitiveness and inclusive growth. The ERPs are the basis for
country-specific policy guidance jointly adopted by the EU and the Western Balkans and
Turkey at ministerial level in May each year.



                                              51
 3.1.     The existence of a functioning market economy
The Turkish economy is well advanced, but serious backsliding continued, leading to deeper
concerns over the functioning of the country’s market economy. A sharp deterioration in
external financing conditions exposed vulnerabilities which have built up over the years. In
response, the Turkish authorities took a range of policy actions that negatively affected the
functioning of the markets, particularly interference with price formation and the introduction
of constraints on the free use of foreign currency. Existing concerns regarding the
independence of key economic institutions, including the independence of their staff, have
deepened, in particular after the transition to the presidential system in which checks and
balances were eroded.
The current account deficit reached a peak in the first half of 2018 before a strong correction
set in as a result of the weakening economy and the fall in the Turkish lira (TL). The inflation
rate jumped to levels far above the upper band of the target range following the currency
crisis and years of high credit growth, high money growth and low real interest rates.
Fiscal, quasi-fiscal and regulatory measures stimulated the economy when it was in an
upswing, combined with relatively easy monetary conditions. In the ensuing disorderly
unwinding of imbalances, measures taken by the authorities have eroded the functioning of
the market economy.
In order to improve the functioning of the market economy Turkey should in particular:
 increase fiscal transparency and credibility, promote domestic savings and reduce
  incentives for greater indebtedness of companies;
 improve the business environment, including by strengthening the rule of law and
  reducing the number of businesses remaining under trusteeship;
 unwind the measures that inhibit the free flow of foreign capital and reduce state
  influence in price setting;
 reduce informality in the labour market and develop more incentives for the participation
  of women in the labour market.
Economic governance
Turkey faced a sharp deterioration in its external financing conditions in the second
half of 2018, which led to strong policy responses, some of which are hampering the
functioning of the market economy. The long-running depreciation of the TL accelerated
markedly in April 2018 and even more sharply in August 2018. Turkey’s high dependence on
foreign financing exposed it to changes in investor sentiment. In response, the Turkish
authorities, in addition to a series of mainstream policy measures such as an interest rate hike
and the adoption of a fiscal consolidation plan, also undertook a range of actions that
undermine the proper functioning of the markets. These include restrictions on the use of
derivatives, requesting banks to charge below-market interest rates for mortgages, banning
the use of foreign currencies in high-value transactions (car leases and real estate), blocking
price hikes for specific consumer goods products, forced transfers of foreign currency
proceeds into domestic currency, and a temporary change in the withholding tax for bank
deposits. The Government also                       Turkey: Real GDP growth and contributions
influenced       price     setting      by 14 % y-o-y
                                             12
coordinating a 'voluntary price 10
reduction' while intensifying the             8
                                              6
sanctioning of price rises deemed             4
                                            2
                                            0
                                           -2
                                           -4   52
                                           -6
                                                  2013        2014      2015        2016       2017      2018
                                                Priv. cons.          Gov. cons.           GFCF
                                                Stocks               Net exports          real GDP growth
                                                                                Source: Macrobond, own calculations
 excessive. At an aggregate level, the emergency measures have had limited impact on
lowering inflationary expectations and reducing inflationary pressure. Concerns regarding the
independence of economic institutions such as the financial supervisor (loosening of macro-
prudential standards to stimulate growth), the national accounts office (dismissal of a senior
staff member), and the central bank (missing the upper band inflation target by a wide margin
for several years, switching between policy rate channels in the absence of economic
rationale) have deepened. These concerns deepened further with the transition to the
presidential system, in which checks and balances have been eroded. The policy guidance
jointly agreed at the May 2018 Economic and Financial Dialogue between the EU and the
Western Balkans and Turkey has been implemented to a limited extent.
Macroeconomic stability
The Turkish economy slowed markedly in 2018 after strong growth in the preceding
years as financial conditions sharply deteriorated in August. In 2013-2017, GDP grew by
an average of 5.5% a year, and GDP per capita, calculated in Purchasing Power Standards
(PPS) EUR, by 4.9%. Due to this high growth, per capita income converged significantly
with EU levels, from 52% in 2010 to 65% in 2017. Loose financial conditions fuelled growth,
in particular in the construction sector. However, this came at the cost of increasing
macroeconomic imbalances, setting the scene for sharp depreciation of the TL and a strong
deterioration in financial conditions and credit supply. While growth was still robust at the
beginning of 2018 (7.1% year-on-year in the first quarter), the deceleration of the economy
that started in the second quarter worsened in the third. An increase in net exports only partly
offset a sharp contraction in domestic demand.
The current account deficit reached a high in the first half of 2018 of 8.0% of GDP
before reversing to a surplus in the second half. The ratio of the current account deficit to
GDP was 7.0% of GDP in 2013 and 5.6% in 2017, averaging 5.0% of GDP over this period.
After reaching a high in the first half of 2018, the current account corrected following the
sharp depreciation of the TL as imports contracted and exports increased. The services
balance increased to 3.3% of GDP over the full year 2018, above the 2015 high of 2.9% of
GDP. A current account deficit of 3.6% of GDP was recorded over the full year 2018. The
services balance improved, with a recovery of tourism in Turkey, although individual tourists
spent on average 15.5% less in 2017 than in 2013 (-18.5% Q1-Q3 2018 vs. Q1-Q2 2013).
Capital flows to Turkey have been volatile, with large shifts within categories. Foreign
direct investment flows (FDI) have been the most stable, but continue to play a relatively
limited role, registering a net inflow of 1.0% of GDP in the first three quarters of 2018. Net
portfolio flows into Turkey surged in 2017 to 2.8% of GDP, but reversed and registered an
outflow of 0.7% of GDP in the first three quarters of 2018. Turkish companies also
increasingly financed themselves through trade credit, receiving more trade credit than they
extended. Trade credit flows reversed in the third quarter however (-0.7% of GDP vs. +0.4%
in 2017). The ratio of official reserve assets to short-term debt declined from 108% (7 months
of imports) in 2016 to 97% (5 months of imports) in 2017, and further to 83% (5 months of
imports) in 2018. Turkey’s gross international debt grew from 40.1% of GDP in 2013 to a
high of 52.9% in the first three quarters of 2018.
Inflation increased markedly from the low double figures in 2017 to over 20% following
the sharp depreciation of the TL in August. Inflation increased to a high of 25.2% year-on-
year in September, before falling to 19.7% in February 2019. The Central Bank of the
Republic of Turkey (CBRT) has used different policy instruments to influence interest rates.
The economic rationale for switching between these interest rate channels is not obvious, and
the use of the late liquidity window (LLW) emergency facility increased the risks of

                                              53
 inappropriate funding levels and moral hazard. By the end of 2017, the LLW had become the
only financing channel. In May-September 2018, the central bank rapidly alternated between
different instruments, announcing first a central repo rate, switching to overnight lending and
then reverting to repo until it increased its main policy rate to 24%, well above market
expectations.
Fiscal and quasi-fiscal policy have worked pro-cyclically and increased government
liabilities. The Government has financed large infrastructure projects through Public Private
Partnerships (PPPs), increasing government contingent liabilities. It has also stimulated credit
growth through government credit guarantees, and state-owned banks have been at the
forefront of increased lending. The primary budget balance fell from 1.7% in 2013 to 0.2% of
GDP in 2017. A benchmark fiscal rule was considered but never implemented. There is no
independent fiscal council, and medium-term projections, which have been targets rather than
conservative estimates, now fall directly under the responsibility of the President.
The budget deficit grew due to pre-                      Turkey: Fiscal developments
election spending. The central              4 % of GDP                                                            40

government budget deficit outcome           2                                                                     30
was 2.4% of GDP. Both primary
expenditures and revenues increased,        0                                                                     20

but expenditures increased at a higher -2                                                                         10
pace. General government debt stood
at 32.6% of GDP in the third quarter -4                                                                           0
                                                  2013        2014        2015 2016         2017       2018*
of 2018, up from 28.3% of GDP in                    Primary balance (lhs)       Interest (lhs)
2017. Foreign currency denominated                  GG balance (lhs)            Public Debt (rhs)
                                          * forecast                                       Source: National sources
debt was stable at 39% of all debt
from the first quarter. With the transition to the presidential system, important changes have
been made to Turkey’s budgetary framework, which raises concerns about accountability and
the transparency of public finances. Budget preparation, implementation and audit are
centralised under the President, as are off-balance-sheet items such as the Turkish Wealth
Fund.
The macroeconomic policy mix led to an unsustainable credit-fuelled economic boom in
2017 and early 2018 that ultimately led to a further increase in vulnerabilities. The
institutional setting weakened with the transition to the presidential system and, despite a
large increase in the nominal policy interest rates, the real interest rate remained close to zero
throughout 2018. However, in a reaction to the crisis, the Government announced an austere
fiscal agenda which, together with reduced political tensions with Turkey’s major allies and
strongly positive real interest rates, worked to restore market confidence. Measures to
stabilise the financial sector by focusing on recapitalising banks and improving their asset
quality were announced in April 2019.
Functioning of product markets
Business environment
Starting a business has become easier. The Government has made good progress, having
legislated to improve the investment environment, especially by reducing and facilitating
bureaucratic procedures and lowering costs for starting a business and obtaining construction
permits. The average cost of starting a business fell from 12.6% to 10.6% of per capita
income in 2018. The number of newly created businesses grew by 17% year-on-year between
2017 and 2018. Market exit has remained costly and time-consuming. While some aspects
have been simplified, insolvency procedures still last an average of five years and the


                                                        54
 recovery rate fell slightly further between 2017 and 2018, from an average of 15.3% to
14.7%. The number of company bankruptcies decreased by 7.1% between 2017 and 2018.
The management of numerous companies has been transferred to the trusteeship of the
Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (TMSF). As of 13 November 2018, 1,008 companies
based in 42 provinces across Turkey with a total asset value of ₺55.9 billion (EUR
8.8 billion) and a total of 45,364 employees had been seized or had a trustee appointed since
the coup attempt. In the new presidential system, the TMSF has been tied to the presidency.
Furthermore, the President now also has the authority to appoint the Head of the TMSF and
its members. Turkey does not score well in international business environment rankings, and
its position in the judiciary components of these rankings is deteriorating.
The informal sector remains large, even if it is being reduced. Turkey has reported a
decline in the informal economy's share of GDP from 32% in 2002 to 27% in 2017. Informal
employment has declined from 45.4% of total employment in 2007 to 34% in 2017. Turkey
put a lot of effort into receiving and addressing the needs of almost four million refugees, but
the high number of refugees has exacerbated the problem of informal employment. From
January 2016, refugees fulfilling certain eligibility criteria could apply for work permits. The
uptake was relatively limited in the first year, in part because of stringent requirements.
Turkey has also allowed the creation of many new businesses headed by Syrians under
temporary protection. Turkey’s performance as concerns corruption has been deteriorating
over the past five years [see Chapter 23].
State influence on product markets
The Government has stepped up its interventions in the price-setting mechanism in key
sectors. Around 30% of the consumer price inflation basket in Turkey is composed of goods
whose prices are set or heavily influenced by public authorities, either directly or indirectly
(price limits, tax rate adjustments). This represents an increase from the 25% reported last
year. In October 2018, the government launched a full-scale programme to fight inflation by
inviting companies to cut prices on consumer goods by at least 10% until the end of the year.
In August 2018, amid growing concerns over the risks of pricing behaviours (especially
significant price hikes and stockpiling), the Ministry of Trade introduced an amendment to
the Regulation on commercial advertising and unfair commercial practices. According to this
new legislative framework, price hikes not justified by a rise in input costs or by the
exchange rate are considered unfair commercial practices. Measures to boost competition,
however, would be more appropriate than direct government interference in price setting. The
Food and Agricultural Product Markets Monitoring and Evaluation Committee is seeking to
contain the rise in food prices by improving supply conditions for unprocessed food products.
There has been backsliding in improving the transparency of State aid. Legislation to
implement the State Aid Law, originally scheduled to be passed by September 2011, has still
not been adopted. The State Aid Authority has still not formally set up a comprehensive State
aid inventory or adopted an action plan to align all State aid schemes with the acquis.
Additionally, Turkey has abolished the administrative structure responsible for implementing
State aid legislation, and fully transferred its mandate to the Economic Policies Council and
to the President, who is also the appointing authority for this Council's members. Thus, the
organisational structure established for the purposes of implementing the Law has been
dismantled, and the current structure is not considered to be operationally independent.
Privatisation and restructuring
The pace of privatisation has slowed considerably, accelerating the downward trend of
previous years. The total volume of completed privatisations fell from $1.3 billion (about

                                              55
 EUR 1.2 billion) in 2016 to $224 million (about EUR 188 million) in 2017. The privatisation
of sugar factories represented by far the largest portion of privatisation revenues in 2018. The
share of the energy sector (hydropower plants) in privatisation tenders remains high. Network
sectors have been liberalised, with the exception of postal services and railways. Government
assets within the scope of the Turkish Sovereign Wealth Fund (TWF) appear to be ring-
fenced from privatisation. Under the presidential system, the Fund has been affiliated to the
Presidency and the mandate of the Prime Minister on the TWF has been transferred to the
President. As a result, the strategic investment plan of the TWF requires the President’s
approval. Furthermore, the President is authorised to transfer public assets to the Fund and to
nominate the auditors for it. The President has become the chairman of the Executive Board
of the TWF and has appointed the Minister of the Treasury and Finance as the Fund's vice-
chairman. Concerns over auditing of the TWF have not been addressed. Borrowing by the
TWF would increase government debt. Government revenues as a share of GDP stood at
31.4% in 2017.
Functioning of the financial market
Financial stability
The financial sector performed generally well and demonstrated resilience during a
period of high volatility in capital flows and the TL exchange rate. Credit growth started
to accelerate at the end of 2016, and continued to do so in the first half of 2017 when the
Turkish non-monetary authorities provided policy stimulus through a relaxation of the macro-
prudential regulation and an expansion of government credit guarantees. As inflation started
to pick up during 2017, the policy rate did not keep up and the realised real interest rate
declined while inflation expectations increased. This likely added to the policy stimulus and
the resurge in credit growth. From the end of 2017, credit growth lost momentum and rapidly
declined throughout 2018. The banking sector’s loans-to-deposits ratio stood at 117.6% in
December 2018. The sector’s capital adequacy ratio increased from 15.6% to 16.8% between
2016 and 2017 and further to 17.3% by December 2018. The proportion of non-performing
loans (NPL) of total banking sector loans remained relatively low, at 3.9% in December
2018. These financial soundness indicators, however, benefited from changes in risk
classification. A stress-test performed by the financial supervisor at the end of December
2018 received criticism for lack of transparency.
Access to finance
Banks have continued to dominate the financial sector. Over the past five years, banks'
credit extension to the private sector increased from 51.2% of GDP in 2013 to 63.6% in the
first three quarters of 2018. Their rapid credit expansion continued in 2017 (+21% year-on-
year) and in the first half of 2018 (+21%). In the second half of 2018, loan growth stalled in
nominal terms and declined strongly in real terms. Compared to the EU, banks offer more
loans to the non-financial corporate sector. The number of banks active in Turkey has
remained relatively stable, at around fifty. Interest rate spreads between commercial loans in
foreign currency and deposits have been relatively stable over the past five years, at around
2 percentage points, and increased somewhat towards the end of 2018. The Government has
continued to use the Credit Guarantee Fund to support SMEs and to provide a boost to the
economy, for instance by agreeing in May 2018 to introduce a loan guarantee package for
businesses worth ₺35 billion. In May 2018, the Government introduced stricter regulation of
the use of foreign currency borrowing by the corporate sector, which should help limit its
exposure to exchange rate fluctuations. While this will benefit the non-financial corporate
sector, part of the losses on existing foreign currency loans will be borne by the banking


                                              56
 sector. Access to foreign finance for smaller companies is now via the banking sector, and is
dependent on the sector’s access to international capital flows and its financial stability.
Functioning of the labour market
Unemployment remained stubbornly
high during the past few years of
strong economic growth, and has
started to rise with the turning of the
economic cycle, pointing to continued
challenges in the labour market.
Although the unemployment rate for
15-64 year-olds remained broadly at the
same level in 2017 and 2018, this hides
a sizable fluctuation within these two
years. The unemployment rate fell by
3 percentage points in 2017 and grew
by 3 percentage points in 2018. The unemployment rate for women (14.2% in 2017) remains
significantly higher than for men (9.7% in 2017). Female unemployment rates have
fluctuated more throughout recent economic developments than male ones. The
unemployment rate for people with a higher level of education reached 12.4% in August
2018. Turkey also suffers from a high level of youth unemployment (15-24 years). This stood
at 20.3% in 2018, representing a decrease of 0.5 percentage points compared with 2017. A
quarter of young people are not in employment, education or training (NEET).
The labour force participation rate is increasing, however, but the gender employment
gap persists. Driven by a growing working-age population, the labour force participation rate
continued to increase from 58.0% in 2017 to 58.5% in 2018. The overall employment rate for
15-64 year-olds increased from 51.5% in 2017 to 52.0% in 2018, with a large difference
between men (70.9%) and women (32.9%). Undeclared work remains widespread, with one
third of the workforce still in informal employment. The minimum wage has risen over the
years in real terms, despite increasing inflation. This complicates the reduction of the
informal sector.
3.2.    The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the
        Union
 Turkey has made some progress and has a good level of preparation in achieving the
 capacity to cope with the competitive pressure and market forces within the EU, with
 improvements in energy sector and some advances in spending on R&D, education and
 physical capital. Turkey is well integrated with the EU market in terms of both trade and
 investment. However, significant weaknesses exist as regards the quality of education and
 gender equality in education, as well as the level of innovation, the energy sector and
 infrastructure. There was no progress on last year’s policy recommendations.
 In order to improve competitiveness and support long-term growth, Turkey should in
 particular:
  increase enrolment in education and improving the quality of secondary education;
  remove trade barriers or equivalent that are not in conformity with the EU-Turkey
   Customs Union, including in public procurement, forced localisation schemes for
   investment and additional duties on imports from non-EU countries.



                                             57
 Education and innovation
Significant problems remain in education in terms of both quality and access, which is
more difficult for girls. The Global Competitiveness sub-indices for the quality of education
ranks Turkey 101 out of 133 countries, and 131 out of 144 countries for the gender gap. Total
expenditure in 2017 was ₺176.5 billion, representing an increase of 9.8% compared to 2016.
Expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP was 4.7% in 2016 and 4.2% in 2017 (EU
average 5.0%, with different demography). The net enrolment rate for pre-school education
for the age group 5 increased from 58.8% in 2017 to 66.9% in 2018. The net enrolment rates
in primary school (first 4 years) increased from 91.2% in 2017 to 91.5% in 2018, but fell for
lower secondary school (second 4 years) from 95.68% to 94.47%. Parents have two choices:
they can send their children to either pre-school or primary school at the age of five. Most
parents choose pre-schools instead of primary schools. In secondary education (final four
years), the net enrolment rate increased from 82.5% in 2017 to 83.6% in 2018. A mismatch
continues between the requirements of the labour market and the skills produced by the
education system. PISA scores (Programme for International Student Assessment) are
relatively low in Turkey (science literacy score of 425 in 2015) in comparison with the
OECD average (493) and the EU.
Research and development (R&D) expenditure increased from 0.86% of GDP in 2014 to
0.96% in 2017, but remained well below the Government’s current target of 1.8% by 2018
(which was defined using the old national accounting methodology). This is also well below
the EU average. About half of this investment came from the private sector. Despite recent
initiatives, cooperation between research institutions and the private sector is still limited.
Physical capital and quality of infrastructure
Improvements in the country’s physical capital have been modest. Total investment
increased from 29.3% in 2016 to 30.0% of GDP in 2017 (28.5% of GDP in 2013). The share
of gross fixed capital formation by the government GDP increased from 5.2% in 2016 to
6.6% in 2017 (4.4% in 2013), while private-sector investment decreased by 0.7% of GDP
between 2016 and 2017. In order to control public spending, the Government has announced
the suspension of investment projects for which the tender process has not yet been launched
or has started but not yet been finalised.
          Turkey: Selected indicators relative to population               Some progress was made in the
1000                                                           12          energy sector, particularly in the
 800                                                                       gas market. A positive development
                                                                         8
 600                                                                       is the launch of Turkey's natural gas
 400
                                                                           spot trading platform, operated by the
                                                                         4
 200
                                                                           Energy Exchange EXIST. Further
                                                                           progress is needed, however, to open
   0                                                                     0
        TR, 2006          EU, 2006        TR, 2016        EU, 2016         the natural gas market and create
         Electricity production, GWh per 1000 inhabitants                  competition for the state-owned
         Road length, km per 1000 inhabitants
         Rail passenger-km per inhabitant, lhs
                                                                           enterprise BOTAŞ. Since 2016, the
                                                          Source: Eurostat Turkish Electricity Transmission
Company (TEiAŞ) has been an observer at the European Network of Transmission System
Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) which allows market players to freely import and export
electricity between the EU and Turkey, thus improving security of supply.
In telecommunications, the number of broadband internet subscribers reached 71.8 million.
Mobile broadband penetration significantly increased to 73.1%, though it is still below the
OECD average of 102.4%. The share of households with access to the internet at home grew


                                                         58
 from 80.7% to 83.8% between April 2017 and April 2018. Over the same period, internet
usage by individuals aged 16-74 increased from 66.8% to 72.9%. Within 2 years of
implementation, the number of 4.5G subscribers reached 68 million. No further progress has
been made on aligning telecommunications legislation with the EU framework. As a source
of concern, Turkey still needs to amend the Internet Law in line with UN and Council of
Europe recommendations.
Sectoral and enterprise structure
The sectoral breakdown of employment growth shows a continued shift towards the
services sector, which accounted for 53.7% of total employment and 61.6% of GDP in 2017.
Industry accounted for 19.1% of employment and 20.7% of GDP, while agriculture employed
19.4% of the workforce and produced 6.1% of GDP. This confirms the higher share of
industry in value added recorded over the past five years. Services contributed by far the
largest part of value added over the same period, with a stable share of 61-62% of total value
added.
SMEs employ around three quarters of Turkey’s workforce and generate more than
half of the economy’s total value added. Turkey continued to implement various corporate
schemes, mostly targeting SMEs. The scope of schemes concerning the organisation of
sectoral national fairs and participation in international fairs, market research and market
entry, investment support for centres of attraction, industry areas, organised industrial zones,
technology development zones, support for tourism operators and Treasury support for
venture capital funds was further extended to cover a wider range of beneficiaries and
activities. Financial institutions do not offer as much long-term funding to SMEs as they do
to large corporations. A large proportion of SMEs will no longer be able to borrow in foreign
currency. According to a protocol signed in January 2018, further Treasury support of about
EUR 9 billion was made available for SMEs through the Credit Guarantee Fund. This has
further stimulated the growth in lending to SMEs.
Economic integration with the EU and price competitiveness




Turkey's trade integration with the EU is high and increased further in 2017 and 2018.
Turkey is the EU's fifth largest trading partner, and the EU remains by far Turkey's largest
trading partner. The share of Turkish exports going to the EU grew from 47.1% to 50%,
while the share of Turkish imports coming from the EU declined marginally from 36.4% to
36.2% between 2017 and 2018. The EU also remains the largest source of foreign direct
investment (FDI) in Turkey, with a 71% share of stocks in 2017, although this is lower than
2013 (77%). About half of trade related to global value chains (GVCs) is with the EU. The
so-called backward participation in GVCs with low value added and low technology content
is particularly important in trade with Asia, whereas the integration with EU GVCs is more
balanced between backward and forward participation thus contributing to value added.
Irrespective of the obligations under the Customs Union with the EU, Turkey has put up

                                              59
 several trade barriers within the Customs Union, including in public procurement, forced
localisation schemes for investment and additional duties on imports from non-EU countries.
Turkish openness, measured as exports and imports over GDP, stood at 54% in 2017.
This is a relatively high figure compared to the past two decades. Price competitiveness
benefited from the continuous depreciation of the TL in 2017; nominal effective depreciation
(NEER) of 18% and real effective appreciation (REER) of 15% on the basis of unit labour
costs, which accelerated in 2018 (NEER -24%, REER -15%).

4.       GOOD NEIGHBOURLY RELATIONS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION
Cyprus
Turkey welcomed the UN’s renewed efforts to consult stakeholders as to a possible
resumption of negotiations. Tensions in the region around the prospect of hydrocarbon
exploration off the coast of Cyprus increased, due to Turkey’s actions and statements
challenging the right of the Republic of Cyprus to exploit hydrocarbon resources in the
Cyprus Exclusive Economic Zone. Turkey has still not fulfilled its obligation to ensure full
and non-discriminatory implementation of the Additional Protocol to the EU-Turkey
Association Agreement and has not removed all the obstacles to the free movement of goods,
including restrictions on direct transport links with Cyprus. There was no progress on
normalising bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus.
Turkey’s actions and statements continued to challenge the right of the Republic of Cyprus to
exploit hydrocarbon resources in the Cyprus Exclusive Economic Zone. In February 2018,
Turkey undertook repeated manoeuvres by naval vessels to block the drilling operations of a
vessel contracted by an Italian company and commissioned by Cyprus, which resulted in the
abortion of the planned drilling activities. In May 2019, Turkey sent a drilling platform
accompanied by military vessels to the Republic of Cyprus’ Exclusive Economic Zone,
escalating tensions further. The EU called on Turkey to respect the sovereign rights of
Cyprus to explore and exploit its natural resources in accordance with the EU acquis and
international law, including the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. In March 2019, the
EU called on Turkey to refrain from any such illegal acts, to which it would respond
appropriately and in full solidarity with Cyprus. The EU has also stressed the need to respect
the sovereignty of Member States over their territorial sea and airspace. In March 2018, the
European Council strongly condemned Turkey's continued illegal actions in the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Aegean Sea, and recalled Turkey’s obligation to respect international
law and good neighbourly relations and to normalise relations with all EU Member States.
As emphasised in the Negotiating Framework and Council declarations, Turkey is expected
to actively support the negotiations on a fair, comprehensive and viable settlement of the
Cyprus issue within the UN framework, in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council
resolutions and in line with the principles on which the EU is founded. It is important to
preserve the progress made so far and to pursue preparations for a fair, comprehensive and
viable settlement, including in its external aspects. Turkey’s commitment and contribution in
concrete terms to this comprehensive settlement remains crucial. The process of granting the
Committee on Missing Persons full access to all relevant archives and military areas has seen
welcome developments, but needs to be further expedited. Despite repeated calls by the
Council and the Commission, Turkey has still not complied with its obligations as outlined in
the Declaration of the European Community and its Member States of 21 September 2005
and in Council Conclusions, including those of December 2006 and December 2015. Turkey
has not fulfilled its obligation to ensure full and non-discriminatory implementation of the
Additional Protocol to the Association Agreement and has not removed all obstacles to the

                                             60
 free movement of goods, including restrictions on direct transport links with the Republic of
Cyprus. There was no progress on normalising bilateral relations with the Republic of
Cyprus.
Turkey continued to veto applications by the Republic of Cyprus to join several international
organisations, including the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD).
Peaceful settlement of border disputes
Bilateral exploratory talks are being held between Greece and Turkey to find common ground
for the start of negotiations on the delimitation of the continental shelf. Greece continued to
object to Turkey’s launch of a tender for offshore oil and gas exploration, including part of
the continental shelf off the Greek island of Castellorizo.
The threat of casus belli in relation to the possible extension of Greek territorial waters, as set
out in a 1995 Turkish Grand National Assembly resolution, still stands. The agreement to
ease increasing tensions in the Aegean Sea reached during the December 2017 visit of the
Turkish President to Greece has not been followed up in practice. Greece and Cyprus
continue to complain about repeated and increased violations of their territorial waters and
airspace by Turkey, including flights over the Greek islands. Another source of serious
concern was the six-month detention of two Greek soldiers who were patrolling the land
border between Greece and Turkey. During this six-month period no bilateral visits took
place. The Turkish President and the Greek Prime Minister had a tête-à-tête meeting at the
margins of the NATO Summit in Brussels in July 2018. The two Greek soldiers were
released in August 2018. The Greek Prime Minister visited Turkey in February 2019. The
Greek Foreign Minister visited Izmir and met with his Turkish counterpart during the
inauguration of the renovated building of the Greek Consulate in Izmir in September 2018,
and on two subsequent occasions. In line with the Negotiating Framework and previous
European Council and Council conclusions, the Council reiterated in June 2018 that Turkey
needs to commit itself unequivocally to good neighbourly relations, international agreements
and the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the United Nations Charter, having
recourse, if necessary, to the International Court of Justice. In this context, the EU has again
expressed serious concern, and urged Turkey to avoid any kind of threat or action directed
against a Member State, or any source of friction or action that would damage good
neighbourly relations and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Regional cooperation
Good neighbourly relations form an essential part of Turkey’s process of moving towards the
EU. Bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and neighbouring EU Member States
were generally good. Operational cooperation with Greece on migration further
continued. However, tensions in the Aegean Sea and Eastern Mediterranean were not
conducive to good neighbourly relations and undermined regional stability and security.
Turkey has continued its policy of engagement in the Western Balkans, in economic, trade,
cultural and political terms, maintaining strong ties with the countries of the region and
supporting their respective efforts to join NATO and the EU. Turkey and Albania agreed on
the terms of a strategic partnership, which could be signed in the course of 2019. Contacts
with Bosnia and Herzegovina developed positively, Turkey providing constant financial
support to the Office of the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Turkey
continued in particular to engage with Bosnia and Herzegovina through its trilateral
mechanism dialogues with Serbia on the one hand and Croatia on the other.


                                                61
 Turkey maintained good relations with Kosovo and expressed constant support for Kosovo’s
integration into regional organisations. Reciprocal high-level visits continue to take place.
The arrest and deportation to Turkey in March 2018, at the request of the Turkish
government, of six Turkish nationals legally residing in Kosovo raised serious concerns about
the respect of due process.
Turkey further developed cooperation with Montenegro, following two bilateral agreements
which were agreed in 2016 and 2017.
Relations with North Macedonia developed. Relations deepened with Serbia, following the
agreement in 2017 to launch a bilateral High Level Cooperation Council, focusing mainly on
economic relations, trade and infrastructure. Turkey continued to support the stability of the
region through the Southeast European Cooperation Process (SEECP).
Bilateral relations with several individual EU Member States not adjoining Turkey (in
particular with Austria, Germany and the Netherlands) improved, followed by Ministerial and
on occasion Presidential visits. The Netherlands and Turkey normalised relations. However,
there continued to be reports of tensions among members of the Turkish diaspora living in
EU Member States, and pressure on them to report on other members of these communities
who allegedly belong to the Gülen movement.

5.        ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP
5.1.      Chapter 1: Free movement of goods
The free movement of goods ensures that many products can be traded freely across the EU
based on common rules and procedures. Where products are governed by national rules, the
principle of the free movement of goods prevents these from creating unjustified barriers to
trade.
Turkey is at a good level of preparation for the free movement of goods. It made limited
progress, mainly in aligning with the ‘New and Global Approach’ and the ‘Old Approach’
acquis. Some technical barriers to trade continue to prevent the free movement of goods and
some localisation schemes and domestic requirements discriminate against EU products,
violating Turkey’s obligations under the Customs Union.
In the coming period, Turkey should in particular:
 eliminate obstacles to the free movement of goods that are in breach of Customs Union
  obligations, such as export restrictions and various requirements related to registration,
  prior approval, licensing and surveillance, and among others non-acceptance of EU good
  manufacturing practices certificates for pharmaceutical products as well as discrimination
  of EU agricultural and forestry tractors
 re-consider its localisation schemes, so as to set up a more conducive investment
  environment, particularly in the area of pharmaceuticals;
 continue to ensure prompt alignment with the EU acquis for this chapter, complete the
  overall revision of the outdated Framework Law on Technical Legislation of Products and
  increase the efficiency of the market surveillance system.
General principles



 This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and the ICJ
Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence.

                                                     62
 With regard to general principles, the framework for the free movement of goods is largely
in place in Turkey. However, issues related to implementation remain. Problems regarding
excessive requests for documentation have been reported when implementing of the
risk-based electronic import control system TAREKS for goods coming from the EU, and
technical barriers to the free movement of goods persist. In addition, localisation schemes in
for pharmaceuticals and agricultural and forestry tractors, as well as local content
requirements for renewable electricity generation create de facto market access barriers for
EU products.
Non-harmonised area
A regulation on mutual recognition in the non-harmonised area has been in force since July
2013. The mutual recognition principle has been introduced to certain areas where national
rules apply. There has been an increasing number of notifications from Turkey in the last
three years, mostly consisting of mandatory technical specifications. The number of
notifications is, however, insufficient in light of Turkey’s legislative activity.
Harmonised area: quality infrastructure
 A legal basis and an administrative structure are in place for technical regulations, standards,
conformity assessment, accreditation, metrology, and market surveillance. The revision of the
Framework Law on Technical Legislation of Products is still pending and the absence of an
overarching legal text leads to a piecemeal alignment of the EU's New Legislative
Framework. The Turkish Standards Institute is independent, able to implement European and
international standards and has adequate staff resources and financing. By November 2018, it
had adopted a total of 19 880 national standards aligned with European standards. The rate of
harmonisation of European Committee for Standardisation standards (CEN) stands at around
97% and at 94% for European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation standards
(CENELEC). The Turkish Standards Institute has been a full member of CEN and
CENELEC since 2012. Eight Turkish economic operators are full members of the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute, ETSI, while the Information and Communications
Technologies Authority is an observer. A national standardisation strategy for 2017-2020 is
in place.
There were 47 notified bodies and two technical approval bodies in Turkey as of February
2019. The Turkish Accreditation Agency, TÜRKAK, is a signatory of multilateral
agreements as part of the European cooperation for Accreditation association. The National
Metrology Institute, TÜBÍTAK-UME is a member of the European Association of National
Metrology Institutes (EURAMET) and the Ministry of Industry and Technology participates
at the European Legal Metrology Organisation (WELMEC). A three- year national metrology
strategy was in place by the end of 2018.
Turkey carries out a regular market surveillance programme in line with the EU legislation
and submits its annual programme to the European Commission. An electronic information
system enables the nine different public entities to report their observations and an annual
report on the results is published. According to the 2018 report, the overall budget allocated
to market surveillance activities fell by 1% and the number of market surveillance inspectors
grew by 4.1% in 2017. There has been a fall of 24% in the number of products subject to
market surveillance checks. A total of 232 704 batches were inspected in 2017, of which 168
704 were produced in Turkey. About 54 917 batches were found to be non-compliant or
unsafe. During inspections carried out by Member State authorities on products originating
in Turkey, 105 750 batches were found to be non-compliant or unsafe. The number of non-
compliant or unsafe products detected decreased by 47% in 2017, mainly due to lower


                                               63
 number of inspections whereas the number of products sent for further tests increased. An
approach that gives priority to particularly risky products is needed. The measures imposed
on non-compliant and unsafe products have been reduced. Market surveillance on products
marketed through e-commerce is very limited.
Harmonised area: sectoral legislation
On the ‘New and Global Approach’ product legislation, Turkey adopted legislation to align
with the acquis on cableway installations, gas appliances, pressure equipment and eco-design
requirements for heaters. Implementing legislation was issued for construction products, lifts,
measuring instruments, recreational crafts and personal watercrafts and energy efficiency of
new hot boilers.
On ‘Old Approach’ product legislation, Turkey adopted new and amending legislation on
detergents, veterinary medicinal products, and market surveillance of automotive products. In
the area of pharmaceuticals, contrary to Customs Union rules, Turkey does not accept EU
good manufacturing practices certificates. Turkey has been a member of the Pharmaceuticals
Inspection Convention since of 1 January 2018 and an observer member of the International
Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals
for Human Use in June 2018. Turkey adopted a regulation in June 2017 aiming to improve
alignment with e REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation, and Restriction of
Chemicals) legislation, but full alignment is still pending. The national registration system for
chemicals is expected to be operational by 2023. Turkey’s localisation schemes for
pharmaceuticals and agricultural and forestry tractors create market access barriers for EU
products. In addition, Turkey systematically delays for some years the application for motor
vehicles of new emission limits, which increases pollution and represents a trade barrier.
On procedural measures, there is a specific licensing and regulation system for economic
operators dealing with drug precursors, with a strict follow-up and monitoring system in
cooperation with the police and customs authorities. National legislation is in place setting
out licensing procedures for firearms (Directive 2009/43). There was no progress on
alignment to the acquis on cultural goods.
5.2.     Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers
Citizens of one Member State have the right to work in another Member State and must be
given the same working and social conditions as other workers.
Preparations for freedom of movement for workers are at an early stage and there has been
no progress during the reporting period.
There has been no progress on access to the labour market, future participation in the
EURES (European Employment Services) network or coordination of social security
systems. So far, Turkey has concluded 16 bilateral social security agreements with EU
Member States, but no new bilateral social security agreements were signed during the
reporting period.
5.3.     Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services
EU natural and legal persons have the right to establish themselves in any Member State and
to provide cross-border services. For certain regulated professions, there are rules on mutual
recognition of qualifications. Postal services are gradually being opened up to competition.
Preparations for right of establishment and freedom to provide services are at an early stage.
No progress has been made in the reporting period. Substantial efforts are still needed to
align with the acquis.

                                               64
 In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 align with the Services Directive on the provision of cross-border services and set up
  a single point of contact.
No progress has been observed on the right of establishment, an area where many
requirements remain in place and continue to restrict this right.
Regarding the freedom to provide cross-border services, requirements for registration,
licensing and authorisation remain in place for service providers registered in the EU. There
is no Point of Single Contact but work is ongoing on transforming the information system in
the retail sector (PERBIS) into a sector-specific point of single contact.
No progress has been made in the area of postal services. The mandate to restructure the
scope of the universal postal services and the components of the reserved area are now with
the President as they have been transferred from the Council of Ministers with the transition
to the presidential system. A reserved area still exists in the standard letter-post service area
and the universal service provider still maintains its exclusivity rights in this area. Turkey
should continue aligning its national legislation with the acquis in the area of postal services.
On the mutual recognition of professional qualifications, the vocational qualifications
authority has continued to issue occupational standards. Some regulated professions remain
subject to reciprocal recognition requirements. Restrictions to mobility of professions, such
as nationality and language requirements remain. Turkey should continue aligning its national
legislation with the acquis in the area of mutual recognition of professional qualifications.
5.4.     Chapter 4: Free movement of capital
In the EU, capital and investments must be able to move without restriction and there are
common rules for cross-border payments. Banks and other economic operators apply certain
rules to support the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing.

Turkey is moderately prepared for free movement of capital. Overall, there has been
backsliding in this area. Confronted with large capital outflows linked to the currency crisis
of August 2018, the authorities imposed restrictions on capital outflows and foreign
exchange-denominated transactions. Legislation on real estate acquisition is not aligned with
the acquis. There has been some progress during the reporting period in the fight against
money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, Turkey should pay particular
attention in the coming year to:
 drafting and adopting an action plan on real estate acquisition by foreigners to lift
  restrictions and increase transparency;
 further aligning with the acquis by strengthening measures to prevent the misuse of its
  financial system for the purposes of money laundering and the financing of terrorism.

On capital movements and payments, Turkey’s legislation on real estate acquisition by
foreigners remains opaque and does not apply to all EU nationals in a non-discriminatory
way. Turkey needs to adopt and implement an action plan to further liberalise the purchase of
real estate by foreigners, bringing its laws in line with the acquis. Turkey has eased the
conditions for granting Turkish citizenship to foreign investors, who are investing in capital
or buying a real estate, by lowering the quantitative criteria (see further down below).
Restrictions on foreign ownership remain in place in sectors such as radio and TV
broadcasting, transport, education and the electricity market. In the wake of the August 2018

                                               65
 currency crisis, the authorities imposed numerous restrictions on capital movements for
residents and non banking corporations in particular for transactions denominated in foreign
currencies (such as banning the use of foreign currencies in high value transactions (car lease
and real estate) and forcing transfers of foreign currency proceeds into domestic currency).
Turkey has reached a good standard in payment systems. The central bank and the banking
regulatory and supervision agency are the two authorities that can grant licences for payment
system operators.
Turkey has made progress in the fight against money laundering and the financing of
terrorism. The country is party to the Council of Europe’s Convention on Laundering, Search,
Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism. In
2016, the Turkish Financial Intelligence Unit - the Financial Crimes Investigation Board
(MASAK) - was granted authority to freeze suspicious funds upon the decision of the
Ministry of Treasury and Finance. Turkey needs to continue its alignment of the legislative
framework and administrative set up with a view to complying with the fourth round of the
Financial Action Task Force’s mutual evaluations. The country currently lacks a
comprehensive strategy and action plan to fight money laundering and terrorist financing.
However, MASAK, in coordination with other relevant institutions, has been preparing a
comprehensive national risk assessment document in view on the upcoming FATF
assessment.
MASAK has strengthened its administrative and enforcement capacity, and has improved its
cooperation with law enforcement agencies and judicial authorities. The number of
suspicious transaction reports submitted to the MASAK has increased from 10 522 in 2017 to
23 893 in 2018. In 2018, the number of people convicted for money laundering amounted to
nine. Confiscations and the level of seizure of assets remain limited in relation to money
laundering and terrorism financing as stand-alone crimes.
Turkey operates an investor citizenship scheme, allowing foreign investors to acquire Turkish
citizenship on the basis of investment. The Commission’s Report of 23 January 2019 on
Investor Citizenship and Residence Schemes underlines that such schemes pose risks for the
EU. Turkey should put in place robust monitoring systems linked to this scheme, in particular
to counter possible security risks such as money laundering, terrorist financing and
infiltration of organised crime. In addition, as provided for by new EU anti-money laundering
rules, Turkey should devote particular attention to enhanced customer due diligence in the
context of the investors’ citizenship programme.
5.5.    Chapter 5: Public procurement
EU rules ensure that the public procurement of goods, services and works in any Member
State is transparent and open to all EU companies on the basis of non-discrimination and
equal treatment.
Turkey is moderately prepared for public procurement. Turkey has been backsliding in the
past year due to the introduction of ever more exemptions for purchases that are subject to
general public procurement rules. Large gaps remain in its alignment with the acquis. The
Commission’s recommendations from last year have not been implemented, and remain valid.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should in
particular:
 revise its public procurement legislation to further align it with the 2014 EU Directives on
  public procurement including concessions and public-private partnerships, to provide for
  remedies in line with EU public procurement directives and to increase transparency;

                                              66
  eliminate the discriminatory domestic price advantages and offset practices and repeal
  exemptions;
 establish an independent procurement body and divide the functions allocated within the
  public procurement authority between a fully independent review body and the central
  procurement institution.
General principles
Concerning the legal framework, Turkey’s national public procurement legislation broadly
reflects the principles of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. However,
compulsory domestic price advantages and offsets, which allow authorities to demand
compensating measures if goods are not produced domestically, are discriminatory and thus
contradicts the EU acquis. Turkey also cancelled the lower limit of $10 million that was a
prerequisite for the offset practice.
The Public Procurement Law (PPL) is partly aligned with the 2004 EU Public Procurement
Directives, but major gaps in compliance remain. The legislation, which is consistent with and
supported by budget and expenditure regulations, allows public contracts to be prepared,
awarded, and managed in line with sound project management principles. However, the
legislation has a number of inconsistencies with the acquis. The coverage of public
procurement rules is significantly reduced by a long and increasing list of exclusions of
varying importance and scope. A range of sector-specific laws limits transparency.
Turkey aims to develop local manufacturing capacity by means of public procurement. The
scope of the compulsory domestic price advantage of up to 15% for ‘medium and high-
technology industrial products’, which was established for such purpose, has been expanded
to the delivery of software. For works contracts, the legislation also stipulates the compulsory
use of certain material, machinery and equipment to be listed by the relevant ministries
without any limit in the form of a certain proportion. In 2018, the number of tenders open to
international competition with domestic price advantage was 43.75 %, up from 37.46% in
2017, while in terms of the contract value it was 44.00%, essentially unchanged from 44.12%
in 2017. The legislation has not yet been aligned with the 2014 EU Directives.
The Public Procurement Authority (PPA) is responsible for implementing the Public
Procurement Law and monitoring the public procurement system. The Ministry of Treasury
and Finance (MoTF) is in charge of coordinating policy formulation and implementation. The
PPA is affiliated to the MoTF but is nominally autonomous. However, the operational
independence of the Public Procurement Board is impaired, since the President of the
Republic is authorised to directly appoint the President and members of the Board, while the
specific qualification requirements in terms of education and sector experience have been
removed.
Award of public contracts
Turkey’s 2018 public procurement market amounted to 5.7% of GDP, which is a drop from
7.5% in 2017. Procedures continued to generally respect transparency and efficiency
principles.
Operational responsibility for preparing and carrying out public-private partnerships
projects lies with the line ministry or other relevant authorities concerned. Since July 2018,
the power of the High Planning Council to approve the public-private partnerships has been
transferred to the President, while early-stage review of the projects, which had been carried
out by the former Ministry of Development, will be carried out by the strategy and budget
directorate affiliated to the Presidency. However, the directorate has not yet established a

                                              67
 sufficient operational capacity. Turkey still lacks a functioning single framework for
coordinating, supervising and monitoring public-private partnership operations.
Monitoring of the contract awards and implementation is satisfactory. The PPA issues
statistics every six-months, which provides a basis for measuring performance and making
improvements to the public procurement system.
The capacity of contracting authorities to manage public procurement processes continues
to improve. Turkey keeps promoting the effective use of e-procurement. Mechanisms to
identify and address corrupt and fraudulent practices are in place, including rules on integrity
and conflict of interest. However, Turkey has not yet developed a risk indicator system that
signals potential integrity problems in the procurement process. Turkey should fill the
substantial number of vacant posts in the PPA in order to strengthen its administrative and
coordination capacity.
Remedies
The right to legal remedy is secured in the Constitution and the PPL lays down the
institutional set up and mechanism for handling complaints. Complainants are entitled to
appeal before the Public Procurement Board, which is part of the PPA. The review and
remedies system provides for speedy, effective and competent handling and resolution of
complaints and sanctions. However, further alignment of the legislation with the EU
Remedies Directive is needed.
In 2018, the Public Procurement Board received 2 017 complaints in 2018 (2.41% of
contracts), compared with 3 526 (3.59% of the contracts) in 2017. The Board’s position as
part of the PPA has remained a concern; indeed, a fully independent Public Procurement
Board would avoid possible conflicts of interest and ensure transparency. With the
introduction of the Presidential system in July 2018, the President of the Republic (instead of
the Council of Ministers) is now responsible for the appointment of the Board’s president and
members.
5.6.    Chapter 6: Company law
The EU has common rules on the formation, registration and disclosure requirements of a
company, with complementary rules for accounting and financial reporting, and statutory
audit.
Turkey is well advanced in company law. Some progress was achieved on the 2018
recommendation on statutory audit.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 finalise technical alignment with the acquis in the company law area;
 adopt the financial reporting standard for small and micro companies to achieve further
  acquis alignment.
On company law, a few alignment issues remain, for example concerning cross-border
mergers, domestic mergers, divisions and takeovers. The central registration recording
system (MERSIS) maintains company registration data electronically, and makes it available
to the public. Setting up of, in particular, limited liability and public companies has been
simplified by the amendments to the Turkish Commercial Code. Work continues to enhance
the corporate governance reporting standards. Disclosure of and public access to company
financial documents in the business register (as required by EU company law and accounting
rules) has still to be put in place.


                                              68
 Concerning corporate accounting and auditing, Turkey is currently preparing the financial
reporting standard for small and micro companies to comply with Directive 2013/34/EU and
the related acquis. Alignment concerning non-financial information or reports on payments to
governments is unclear. Efforts to extend the scope of statutory auditing continued and
thresholds have been increased based on a decision published in 2018. Public-interest entities
(PIEs) of any size are obliged to appoint a statutory auditor and there are additional specific
requirements in place for the statutory audit of PIEs. A system of investigations and sanctions
is in place. National standards on auditing and a code of ethics for auditors have been issued
in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing and the International Ethics
Standards Board for Accountants Ethics Code. Further work is required to align with the
acquis on accounting and the statutory audit.
5.7.     Chapter 7: Intellectual property law
The EU has harmonised rules for the legal protection of intellectual property rights (IPR)
and of copyright and related rights. Rules for the legal protection of IPRs cover, for instance,
patents and trademarks, designs, biotechnological inventions and pharmaceuticals. Rules for
the legal protection of copyright and related rights cover, for instance, books, films,
computer programmes and broadcasting.
Turkey has a good level of preparation in this area. There has been limited progress during
the reporting period. Recommendations from last year’s report have been only partially met
and remain valid:
 adopt copyright legislation in line with the acquis;
 improve enforcement measures to combat industrial and intellectual property
  infringements, including further specialisation in Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
  courts and facilitated procedures to obtain search and seizure warrants;
 sustain a constructive dialogue with IPR owners and enhance awareness raising on
  concerns related to counterfeiting and piracy, focusing on the benefits of a strong IPR
  protection system for economic growth.
With regard to copyright and related rights, the draft copyright law is under consultation.
Longstanding systemic problems to be addressed by the new copyright law remain, in
particular: the treatment of foreign producers, public performance rights, reproduction rights,
collective rights management, distribution of copyright levies to right owners, exceptions, the
compensation method, interpreters' rights, and performers' rights.
Concerning industrial property rights, the Turkish Patent and Trademark Office (TPTO)
has organised various trainings on different industrial property rights and the code of conduct
of patent and trademark agents. Since the new Industrial Property Law was adopted in early
2017, implementation and enforcement has been slow. There is a lack of common legal
understanding in particular on new enforcement procedures such as accelerated destruction.
Regulatory data protection is not aligned with the Customs Union Agreement. Generic
producers are able to apply for market authorisation before the patent rights have expired.
Concerning judicial enforcement, enforcement in the area of accelerated destruction
procedure is weak. Warehousing and storing of counterfeit goods seized in the operations
remain a longstanding problem. Courts take expert witness statements even where is
unnecessary. Supervision of expert witnesses, trademark and patent agents for their conduct
is weak and conflict of interest issues related to them have not been resolved. The most
common complaint from different industries is the problems they encountered in finding out
about search and seizure warrants against counterfeit goods. There is a lack of specialised

                                              69
 knowledge and experience in the lower courts on IPR issues. The Turkish National Police
conducted successful operations against traders of fake spirits and tobacco products in
December 2018.
Turkey is a producer of counterfeit leather goods, shoes, textile products, foodstuffs and
cosmetics. Counterfeit and fake products are sold both online and in open bazaars and in
international fairs in touristic areas of Turkey. They pose important risks to consumer health
and safety. Unauthorised use of software is very widespread.
In 2017, the number of e-applications by IPR right owners via Customs Administration’s IT
system increased by 14.4% compared with 2016. In 2017, the number of counterfeit goods
seized by the Customs in the border controls increased by 18.3% compared to 2016, due to
ongoing training of customs officers. Customs Administration has improved coordination of
the customs enforcement through information exchange with other units of the Customs
Administration. IPR indicators related to confiscated counterfeit goods are now more
frequently and structurally used in risk analysis system. In the second half of 2018, a number
of trainings on counterfeiting for the customs officers were launched in cooperation with
around 65 trademark owners.
5.8.    Chapter 8: Competition policy
EU rules protect free competition. They include antitrust rules against restrictive agreements
between companies and abuse of dominant position and also include rules on concentrations
between companies, which would significantly impede competition. EU rules also set out a
system of State aid control. Governments are only allowed to grant State aid if restrictive
conditions are met, with a view to prevent distortion of competition.
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of competition policy. There has been
backsliding particularly concerning the independence of the state aid authority and State aid
legislation. Legislation on anti-trust and mergers is largely aligned with the acquis.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should
in particular:
 step up the enforcement of the State aid law by adopting secondary legislation without
  further delay and give access to an updated inventory of aid schemes;
 establish an operationally independent State aid authority;
 revise its competition legislation to increase the alignment level with the EU acquis in the
  area of anti-trust and mergers).
Anti-trust and mergers
The legislative framework is broadly aligned with the acquis. The Law on the Protection of
Competition reflects Article 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union. Implementing legislation in this field is largely in place. Turkey needs to harmonise
the legislation with the acquis by introducing de minimis, commitments and settlement
procedures and amendments in mergers control.
Regarding the institutional framework, the Competition Authority is responsible for
implementing the Law on the Protection of Competition. Its mandate is very similar to that of
the European Commission. Operationally, it is a largely independent competition authority.
However, the direct appointment of the president and the members of the competition
authority by the President of the Republic without involvement of the relevant public



                                             70
 institutions and the lack of specific requirements for professional qualifications on education
and sector experience for board members impair the independence of the Board.
The Competition Authority’s enforcement capacity is adequate. Overall implementation is
effective, but there has been a fall in the number of decisions, in particular on anti-trust
(down from 191 in 2013 to 88 in 2018), and in the fines imposed (down from EUR 195
million in 2013 to 57.9 million in 2018). The number of ex officio investigations remains low
(from 17 in 2012, to 8 in 2018). The Competition Authority conducted an average of 85
down-raids annually between 2016 and 2018 (76 in 2018). In 2018, out of the 95 judgements
concluded as a result of the appeals against the Competition Authority decision, 86% of them
were upheld by national courts.
State aid
The legislative framework is partially in line with the acquis. State aid regulations do not
cover agriculture, fisheries and services sectors, which are not part of the EU-Turkey
Customs Union. Turkey’s Law on the Monitoring and Supervision of State Aid is broadly in
line with Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
However, concerning secondary legislation Turkey repealed a set of deadlines previously
defined in the law and empowered the former Council of Ministers (since July 2018 the
President) to delay the enforcement of implementing legislation for an unlimited period.
Therefore, the implementing legislation required to enforce the State aid control is not in
place and Turkey has yet to adopt an action plan for alignment with the acquis.
Concerning the institutional framework, during the reporting period the former Directorate
General for State Aids, administratively assisting and undertaking the management of the
State Aid Monitoring and Supervision Board, was abolished. The mandate of the Board
which was responsible for implementing the law has been fully transferred to the Economic
Policies Council and to the President, who is also the appointing authority of this Council's
members. Thus, the organisational structure previously established for the purposes of
implementing the State aid law has been repealed and the current structure is not considered
as completely operationally independent.
No assessment of Turkey's enforcement capacity can be made as there is no functional
organisational structure or no implementing legislation in force. A State aid inventory has yet
to be set up and made accessible.
Liberalisation
Competition and State aid rules apply to state-owned enterprises. However, the competences
of the Prime Minister, the Council of Ministers and the High Planning Council concerning
the privatisation process have been transferred to the President, who has assumed a power
over the privatisation decisions and procedures.
5.9.        Chapter 9: Financial services
EU rules aim at ensuring fair competition between and the stability of financial institutions,
namely banking, insurance, supplementary pensions, investment services and securities
markets. They include rules on authorisation, operation and supervision of these institutions.
Turkey has a good level of preparation in the area of financial services. There has been no
progress during the reporting period.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should
in particular:
 further strengthen bank governance and supervision, crisis management and the

                                              71
    resolution framework;
 continue to support the development of Turkish capital markets and their proper
  supervision.
For banks and financial conglomerates, the Banking Regulatory and Supervisory Agency
has determined the requirements to be met for the inclusion of debt in the calculation of
banks’ equity. It has also amended the regulation on bank transactions regarding establishing
companies and acquiring shares. According to this amendment, under certain conditions, the
agency’s approval is no longer required for banks when establishing new companies or
acquiring shares in existing companies established by more than one bank or financial
institution. The agency has introduced new procedures for the rescheduling of loans granted
to debtors. Under the new presidential system, the president and the members of the agency
and of the Saving Deposit Insurance Fund will be directly appointed by the President of the
Republic for a period of 4 years.
Regarding insurance and occupational pensions, in December 2018 the Ministry of
Treasury and Finance introduced an amendment to rules on automatic enrolment of
employees into the pension scheme by their employers. With the new legislative framework,
employees who have used their right of withdrawal from the auto-enrolment pension system
will be automatically re-enrolled in the system within three years.
There has been some progress on financial market infrastructure, notably with regard to the
supervision and investment services, but no progress on securities markets and investment
services. The independence of the Capital Market’s Board has been reduced, since the
President of the Republic has been granted the power to directly appoint its president and the
members for a period of four years.
5.10.    Chapter 10: Information society and media
The EU supports the smooth functioning of the internal market for electronic
communications, electronic commerce and audio-visual media services. The rules protect
consumers and support universal availability of modern services.
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of information society and media. There
has been backsliding in this sector. Lack of transparency of media funding, the growing
influence of political interests on editorial policies, the concentration of media ownership, the
shrinking space for pluralism and restrictions on freedom of expression, the lack of
independence of regulatory authorities remain of concern. There is inadequate competition in
fixed voice and broadband markets and excessive taxation and costs for operators and
consumers of information and communications technologies.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should
in particular:
 improve the independence of the regulatory authorities for telecommunications and media
   and their board members and amend the Internet Law in line with the Venice
   Commission’s recommendations;
 align the universal service, authorisation arrangements, market access and rights of way in
  electronic communications with the EU acquis;
 complete the release of 700 MHz from broadcasting services of mobile broadband;
→ take steps to strengthen the public broadcaster and to finalise the digital switchover
  process.

                                               72
 On electronic communications and information and communications technologies (ICT),
there has been no progress in aligning legislation with the acquis on market access and
universal service. Turkey has modified the appointment regime for the Information and
communication technologies Board by authorising the President of the Republic to directly
appoint its members. Specific requirements concerning education and sector experience as
qualifications for such appointments have also been removed. Additionally, the mandate of
the Cyber Security Council composed of representatives from the line ministries has been
fully transferred to the President. The independence of the related Board and the Council,
which has been impaired by these changes, remains a concern. Competition in the fixed voice
and broadband market is not effective. Fees charged by municipalities for rights of way and
for base stations installation further increase costs. Mobile broadband penetration increased
significantly to 73.1% in the second quarter of 2018, though it is still below the OECD
average of 102.4%. The fixed broadband penetration rate is 15.7% compared to the OECD
average of 30.4%. Within 2 years of implementation, the number of 4.5G subscribers reached
68 million. As a source of concern, Turkey still has not amended the Internet Law in line with
UN and Council of Europe recommendations (see Chapter 23 — Judiciary and fundamental
rights).
Concerning information society services, the national strategy covering 2015-2018 remains
in place and there is a need to update it. The proportion of people using e-government
increased from 42% to 45.6%.
In the area of audio-visual policy, there has been no progress in alignment with the acquis. A
State of Emergency decree published on 12 January 2018 shut down two more media outlets
on grounds of alleged links with terror organisations, transferring their assets and properties
to the control of the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund. With this, the number of radio and TV
stations closed following the coup attempt of 15 July 2016 reached 63. The sale of Turkey's
largest media group in March 2018 led to a further concentration of media in the hands of a
few groups close to the Government. The media landscape is now dominated by outlets either
close to the Government or dependent on public contracts, which further reduces pluralism in
the Turkish media. The lack of transparency of funding and links with political and business
spheres also affect the private media sector, displaying a strong influence on editorial
policies.
In the run up to the presidential and parliamentary elections of June 2018, the incumbent
President and his party enjoyed a notable advantage, which was also reflected in
proportionally excessive coverage by government-affiliated public and private media. During
the elections, compliance with media regulations is overseen by the Radio and Television
Supreme Council (RTÜK). The decision of the Supreme Board of Elections (SBE) listing the
channels to be monitored during the election campaign was adopted as late as 28 May 2018,
less than a month before the elections. RTÜK's reports to the SBE are not public. Moreover, a
decree repealed the SBE’s powers to sanction radio and TV broadcasters, which fail to be
impartial and politically neutral. The public broadcaster TRT's channels, which are 90%
dependent on state funding, were virtually inaccessible for the opposition, in particular during
the election campaign. Taken together, all these factors left the media campaign practically
without effective supervision according to the Council of Europe/PACE report. (See Political
criteria)
In March 2018, the Parliament approved a bill, granting RTÜK the authority to regulate
online content, a form of media increasingly used by critical voices in Turkey. In September
2018, following the approval of its Supreme Council, RTÜK published a draft internet
regulation on its website. The draft contains controversial provisions with regard to

                                              73
 jurisdiction, licencing and restricting access to content. In January 2019, the Supporting,
Evaluation and Classification of Cinema Films Law was published in the Official Gazette.
According to the Law, cinema films that are locally produced or imported will be evaluated
and classified before they are made available for commercial circulation and screening.
Following the changeover to the executive presidency, a presidential decree published in July
2018, affiliated the Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) with the Presidential
Communication Authority and RTÜK with the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. Its effects
on the functioning of RTÜK remain to be seen.
As for the media regulator, public consultations with media service providers continued.
RTÜK's decisions are available online. However, membership of RTÜK's Supreme Council
does not reflect the current composition of the Parliament, as required by law.
The completion of the digital switchover remains uncertain, as the re-tendering procedure has
not yet started.
5.11.    Chapter 11: Agriculture and rural development
The common agricultural policy supports farmers and rural development. This requires
strong management and control systems. There are also common EU rules for quality policy
and organic farming.
There is some level of preparation in the area of agriculture and rural development. Some
progress has been made in the past year, especially continuing to improve implementation of
the EU-Turkey trade agreement for agricultural products. However, the Commission’s
recommendations from last year have been only partly taken up. There is still no strategy for
producing agricultural statistics.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
→ adopt a strategy for producing agricultural statistics;
→ develop a strategy to align its agricultural support policy.
On horizontal issues, the development of an integrated administration and control system
(IACS) has continued. The Farm Accountancy Data Network covers all 81 provinces and has
now been integrated into the agricultural production and registration system. The agricultural
census is not yet complete and the strategy for agricultural statistics has not yet been adopted.
Further alignment with EU policies requires the decoupling of payments from production and
linking area-based payments to cross-compliance standards.
On common market organisation, no progress was made in legislative alignment.
The EU and Turkey have amended Protocol 2 to Decision No 1/98 of the EC-Turkey
Association Council on the trade regime for agricultural products and agreed to broaden the
scope of the tariff quota for meat products exported from the EU to Turkey to include fresh
and chilled bovine meat. This will be an important step forward to ensure proper and
transparent management of the import quota is ensured in line with the new rules on the
management of tariff quotas.
In the EU pre-accession programme for rural development (IPARD II), 12 746 applications
were received and 3 446 projects given contracts, with the EU contributing a total of EUR
245.4 million by the end of 2018 to investments in agricultural holdings and in processing
and marketing, and farm diversification (measures 1, 3 and 7). Accreditation for budget
implementation tasks was granted to the Links between Actions of Rural Development
(LEADER) measure in February 2019. There was a series of events and studies on

                                               74
 establishing and improving of the National Rural Network (NRN) in several provinces.
Twenty-five local action groups established under LEADER have started developing local
action strategies. Through LEADER and the NRN measures, the successful IPARD
Programme implementation also involved civil society.
In quality policy, further implementing regulations were adopted following the 2017
Intellectual Property Law that increased the level of alignment with the EU Geographical
Indications legislation. The EU-Turkey reinforced cooperation on mutual registration of
Geographical Indications (GIs) has been relaunched, aiming at facilitating the mutual
registration and adequate protection of GIs through information and knowledge exchange.
Alignment with the EU acquis of the regulation on principles and implementation of organic
farming is well advanced. The Turkish Accreditation Agency accredits organic agriculture
control bodies.
5.12.    Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy
EU hygiene rules for foodstuff production ensure a high level of food safety. Animal health
and welfare and the safety of food of animal origin are safeguarded together with quality of
seeds, plant protection material, protection against harmful organisms and animal nutrition.

There is some level of preparation in the area of food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary
policy. There has been some progress in the past year concerning enforcement capacity for
animal welfare, food, feed and animal by-products and food safety legislation. However, the
Commission’s recommendations from last year have only been taken up in part. Turkey has
ratified the European Convention for the Protection of Animals kept for Farming Purposes,
but food establishments still need to be upgraded to meet EU standards. Full implementation
of the acquis in this area will require significant further work.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 upgrade food establishments to meet EU standards, including submitting a national
  programme and a monitoring plan;
 make progress on addressing zoonoses.

There has been limited progress in aligning and implementing the acquis on general food
safety. Turkey has not yet fully aligned its veterinary policy with the EU acquis. The
identification and registration of bovines and small ruminants has continued. The regulation
concerning the identification and monitoring of equidae, and the one concerning cats, dogs
and ferrets, were adopted. Electronic identification of cattle began in 2018. Border inspection
posts at land and sea borders and at the Sabiha Gökçen Airport in Istanbul are still not fully
operational.
Turkey has continued its fight against animal diseases. Foot and mouth disease outbreaks
have decreased as a result of mass vaccination. The disease-free zone ensured by vaccination
in the area of western Turkey bordering Bulgaria and Greece has been maintained by strict
movement controls. Vaccination against lumpy skin disease has continued. A regulation on
disease-free compartmentalisation and another on protection against and combating
bluetongue have entered into force. Significant efforts are still needed to fully align with the
acquis on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and surveillance systems, including full
compliance with the February 1998 Decision of the EC-Turkey Association Council on the
trade regime for agricultural products. Further structural and administrative work is necessary
to fully implement the acquis on animal welfare. A regulation has been adopted on minimum
rules for protection of chickens kept for meat production. Turkey has ratified the European

                                              75
 Convention for the Protection of Animals kept for Farming Purposes. There has been no
progress on zoonoses.
Turkey has continued to implement training, inspection and monitoring programmes for the
placing on the market of food, feed and animal by-products on the market, and
administrative capacity for official controls has been improved. No progress has been made
on developing the national plan for upgrading agri-food establishments. Significant work is
still needed to apply the new rules on registering and approving food establishments.
Substantial work on animal by-products is still required. Provisions for funding inspections
have still not been aligned with the EU system.
Alignment of food safety rules with the acquis has advanced on issues such as labelling,
additives and purity criteria, flavourings, food supplements and enzymes. Relevant
regulations have been adopted, among others for labelling and specifications for food
additives.
Progress on specific rules for feed remains limited. There has been no progress on
phytosanitary policy. Alignment is yet to be completed for new foods and for genetically
modified organisms.
5.13.   Chapter 13: Fisheries
The common fisheries policy lays down rules on fisheries management, protects living
resources of the sea and limits the environmental impact of fisheries. This includes setting
catch quotas, managing fleet capacity, rules on markets and aquaculture and support for
fisheries and coastal communities.
Preparations in fisheries remain at an early stage. Some progress was made on resources
and fleet management, inspection and control, and on international agreements. However, no
progress was made on addressing last year’s recommendation on adopting a fisheries law.
Therefore, in the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
→ adopt a fisheries and aquaculture law which is aligned with the EU acquis.
Institutional capacity has been further improved. There has been some progress in resources
and fleet management. The total of 1264 fishing vessels over 10 meters long has been
scrapped from the fleet since 2013. Nearly 1500 vessels were monitored via the new vessel
monitoring system. The system monitors sea fishing activities as well as the registry,
location, time, speed and destination of the vessels, and of the fishery catch data. The
implementation of electronic logbooks has also started with the new system. A new support
scheme has been introduced to improve data quality, particularly socio-economic data on
marine and inland artisanal fishing vessels, and to ensure sustainable management.
On inspection and control, some progress was made in legislative alignment and on
implementation of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna
(ICCAT) recommendations on Bluefin tuna. No progress was made on market policy.
Regarding international agreements, cooperation between Turkey and the EU has continued
in ICCAT and the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean. Turkey has signed
the Sofia Ministerial Declaration on Black Sea Fisheries and Aquaculture and the Regional
Plan of Action for Small-Scale Fisheries in the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. The
cooperation agreements with Somalia, Gambia and Mauritania have been ratified. Turkey has
also ratified the FAO Agreement on Port State Measures to prevent, deter and eliminate
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. Because the EU acquis implements the provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, including through the common

                                              76
 fisheries policy, Turkey’s ratification of the Convention is necessary to improve cooperation
with the EU on fisheries and maritime policy.
5.14.   Chapter 14: Transport policy
The EU has common rules for technical and safety standards, security, social standards, and
market liberalisation in road transport, railways, inland waterways, combined transport,
aviation and maritime transport.
Turkey is moderately prepared in transport policy. Some progress has been made in the
reporting period. The institutional set up of the Ministry undergone significant
re-organisation. Some further liberalisation was implemented in the railway market. In the
maritime sector, the institutional and technical capacity to implement international
conventions remains limited. Negotiations for a comprehensive agreement in the aviation
sector as well as the working arrangement with the European Aviation Safety Agency
(EASA) are two significant issues which will take Turkey a step further. In the coming year,
Turkey should in particular:
 finalise its new Road Safety Strategy for 2021-2030 in line with the EU's safe system
  approach;
 create a competitive level playing field for all railways operators;
 take steps towards alignment with the EU acquis particularly in the areas of aviation,
  intelligent transport systems and EU passenger rights in all modes of transport.
As regards the general transport acquis, Turkey is preparing a new comprehensive study to
assess the level of alignment in the transport sector and identify gaps and actions to close
them. The now finished logistics master plan has broadly identified the locations of the
logistics centres in the regions. Turkey has also finalised and published its intelligent
transport systems strategy and action plan. Turkey is not yet aligned with the Clean Power for
Transport package.
On road transport, the legal framework is well aligned with the acquis. Turkey has
continued to carry out robust roadside inspections. Cargo securing remains an issue in
updating the relevant Turkish road transport legislation. Turkey’s Directorate-General for
Highways of the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure has published a regulation on road
infrastructure safety assessment. Road safety is suffering from the lack of a lead agency and
Turkey needs to take significant steps to ensure better coordination among the relevant
stakeholders with a concrete road safety strategy for the safe system approach. The Turkish
national police joined the European Traffic Police Network (TISPOL) in July 2018. There
has been no progress in the negotiations to implement the smart tachograph in the European
Agreement concerning the Work of Crews of Vehicles engaged in International Road
Transport (AETR), which covers Turkey. Because the smart tachograph will be mandatory
under EU law on 15 June 2019 for vehicles registered in the EU, delays in the AETR
agreement not only prevent Turkey from fully aligning with EU standards on road safety but
will also pose a challenge for vehicles manufacturers established in Turkey, since they will
have to find a way to install smart tachographs on their vehicles intended for the EU before
they are put on the market.
The institutional set up in the railways sector is not fully aligned with EU requirements. The
Directorate-General for Rail Regulation is not sufficiently independent from the Ministry of
Transport. Its human resources and technical capacity have not reached the level of its
European peers. The state-owned railway operator (TCDD Transport) is financially
dependent on the funds channelled from the state-owned Infrastructure Manager (TCDD

                                              77
 Infrastructure) in breach of the principle of separation of essential functions. A regulation on
railway interoperability is in its final stage of preparation pending consultation with the
European Commission. TCDD Infrastructure has issued a network statement, which defines
the terms under which competing railway companies can access the railway infrastructure
including access pricing methodology. Two passenger and three freight train operation
certificates have been issued to private sector operators. All railway vehicles in the country
have been registered in the rolling stock registry. However, implementing legislation
provides that only domestically produced freight and passenger rolling stock may be
registered until 1 January 2020, establishing an entry barrier for imports. The DG for Railway
Regulation has issued safety certificates for all railway operators. It has certified the training
centre in Eskisehir for training of train drivers and safety critical positions. It is also
establishing a statistical portal to aggregate all railway-related services and productivity data.
In maritime transport, emergency response centres in Tekirdağ and Antalya have been fully
operational since early 2018. Turkey has become a party to two International Maritime
Organisation (IMO) conventions on the control of harmful anti-fouling systems on ships, and
on the safe and environmentally sound recycling of ships. Turkey needs to develop the
institutional and technical capacity required to fulfil its responsibilities under IMO
conventions. Turkey has still not signed the Paris Memorandum of Understanding, despite
being on its white list. Turkey has adopted all the necessary legislation to ensure alignment
with the acquis on a Community vessel traffic monitoring and information System (VTMS).
Turkey has to align with the relevant EU legislation on inland waterway. Turkey has not
signed the main international agreements on inland waterways.
In aviation, Turkey is aiming to become fully integrated into the EU aviation system,
including becoming a member of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). Several
instructions have been issued based on EASA Operations. The new Istanbul Airport was
inaugurated in October 2018. Negotiations on the comprehensive EU-Turkey aviation
agreement continued, albeit at a slow pace. They will define the future of aviation relations
between the EU and Turkey and the level of Turkey's integration into the EU single aviation
market. There has been no progress on the renewal of the working arrangement between the
Turkish Directorate-General for Civil Aviation and the EASA. Given the insufficient human
resources in the aviation sector, Turkey needs to fully operationalise the aviation training
academy. The lack of adequate communication between air traffic control centres in Turkey
and Cyprus continues to compromise air safety in the Nicosia flight information region,
requiring an operational solution. In other areas of the aviation acquis, Turkey is making
progress in aligning its regulations with the acquis but further efforts are needed, particularly
in air traffic management.
There has been some progress on combined transport. Turkey prepared a four step multi-
modal national transport master plan in March 2018 and transport information management
systems in June 2018.
As long as restrictions remain in place on vessels and aircraft registered in Cyprus, related to
Cyprus, or whose last port of call was Cyprus, Turkey will not be in a position to fully
implement the acquis relating to this chapter.
5.15.    Chapter 15: Energy
EU energy policy covers security of supply, the internal energy market, hydrocarbons,
renewable energy, energy efficiency, nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection.



                                               78
 Turkey is moderately prepared in this chapter. Good progress has been made on security
of supply, renewable energy and energy efficiency.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 adopt legislation in line with the Euratom acquis, clarifying structural, staffing and
  coordination issues in nuclear energy regulation and guarantee the independence of the
  newly established nuclear energy regulator;
 deepen gas market reform by setting up a legally binding plan and a timetable for the
  unbundling of activities and establishing transparent, cost-reflective and
  non-discriminatory pricing in the gas sector;
 roll out the implementation of the national energy efficiency action plan (NEEAP) in
  particular the envisaged national energy efficiency financing mechanism.
Very good progress has been made on security of supply. The first phase of the Trans-
Anatolian Pipeline project (TANAP) was completed in June 2018. The second phase, aiming
to connect TANAP to Europe via the Trans-Adriatic pipeline project (TAP) is expected to be
finalised according to plan by June 2019. The offshore section of the TurkStream pipeline
project, run by Turkey and Russia, was completed in November 2018.
In addition to the two floating storage regasification unit (FSRU) terminals operated by
Turkey's Petroleum Pipeline Corporation (BOTAŞ), the construction of a third FSRU on the
Aegean coast started in 2018. In addition, Turkey started the expansion of its second
underground gas storage facility (Salt Lake) to increase its capacity to 5.4 billion cubic
meters of gas and a daily production capacity of 80 million cubic meters of gas until 2020.
This expansion is considered very important for Turkey's security of supply. Turkey is at an
advanced stage of implementation of the acquis on mandatory oil stocks and has already
constituted the necessary volume of these stocks. Relevant legal provisions became effective
in January 2018.
As regards electricity networks, Turkey has progressed in aligning with the EU network
codes, fostering network integration and greater capacity of interconnections to increase
efficiency and security of electricity supply. In October 2018, the Turkish electricity
transmission system operator (TEIAŞ) applied to continue as an observer member of the
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E). The
modernising and upgrading of the Turkish electricity network in line with ENTSO-E should
continue, including on the harmonisation of Turkish electricity codes with relevant EU
network codes and on further acquis alignment.
In the internal energy market, some progress has been made on pending improvements in
transparent, cost-reflective and non-discriminatory pricing mechanisms for electricity and
gas. The capacity of Turkey's Energy Market Regulatory Authority (EMRA) to implement
transparency and competition law on the Turkish natural gas market in line with the EU
Regulation on Wholesale Market Integrity and Transparency (REMIT) needs to be improved.
Legislation on natural gas market transactions also needs to be improved.
A positive development was the launch in September 2018 of Turkey's natural gas spot
trading platform, operated by the EXIST Energy Exchange. The platform enables spot market
transactions in natural gas, balancing transactions and reconciling of imbalances. However,
the viability of the exchange is impacted by BOTAŞ's dominant market position. BOTAŞ
remains vertically integrated and has yet to unbundle its trading and grid operator functions.
Insufficient progress was reported on establishing a transparent, cost-reflective and non-
discriminatory gas transit regime.

                                             79
 The Turkish Treasury has issued a guarantee for the external debt financing of four major
BOTAŞ projects, namely: the Salt Lake Natural Gas Underground Storage Facility, the
Trans-Anatolian Natural Gas Pipeline (TANAP), the North Marmara Natural Gas Storage
Plant and the Floating LNG Storage and Gasification Unit. EMRA has lifted tariffs for LNG
and FSRU terminals to promote LNG and FSRUs investments in Turkey.
The state-owned electricity generation company (EÜAŞ), responsible for more than a third of
Turkey's power generation capacity, took over the Turkish electricity trading and contracting
Company (TETAŞ) in July 2018. This has made EÜAŞ responsible for signing energy
purchase and sales agreements as well as importing and exporting electricity.
On hydrocarbons, Turkey is at an advanced stage of alignment with EU legislation but
needs to further align with Directive 2013/30/EU on the safety of offshore oil and gas
operations, also as regards transit of hydrocarbons. At the end of 2018, Turkey started
exploration activities for oil and gas in the eastern Mediterranean. Turkey undertook seismic
research activities in the Cyprus' Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and threatened to conduct
its own drilling activities for hydrocarbon exploration in the Cyprus EEZ.
Turkey's progress in the renewable energy sector has been good. Three large tenders in
photovoltaics (PV) and onshore and offshore wind energy generation were launched based on
a model applying a fixed feed-in tariff and guaranteed investment in domestic manufacturing
and R&D for a fixed period of time. These tenders failed to attract sufficient investor interest,
however, and are expected to be extended or relaunched in 2019. Concerns have been voiced
regarding special incentives and local-content requirements, which affect access by EU and
other international companies' to tenders in the renewable energy sector.
The Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources is one of the few that kept its name and
political mandate, with some structural changes in renewable energy and energy efficiency
under the Presidential executive system introduced in Turkey in 2018.
Progress on energy efficiency has been good in terms of adopted legislation, and moderate in
terms of actual implementation. The long-awaited national energy efficiency action plan
(NEEAP) was finally adopted in 2018. Although the plan is broadly aligned with the EU
Energy Efficiency Directive 2012/27/EU, the 2007 Energy Efficiency Law needs to be
revised in order to avoid overlaps and account for institutional changes. Turkey needs to align
with the 2010 Energy Performance of Buildings Directive. The development of a national
energy efficiency financing mechanism, envisaged under the NEEAP, has to be prioritised.
Better coordination by involving and regularly consulting relevant stakeholders in the design,
monitoring and evaluation of energy efficiency policies and measures will help ensure their
feasibility and increase the rate of compliance.
Moderate progress has been made on nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation
protection. A new atomic industry regulatory body was created in 2018 by presidential
decree. The decree has left gaps on structural, staffing and coordination issues and needs to
be followed up by additional legislation, consistent with the Euratom acquis, to bridge those
gaps. Given Turkey’s plan to have a first nuclear power reactor commissioned and
operational by 2023, the legal and institutional framework should be improved rapidly to
align with the EU's nuclear legislation and ensure nuclear safety in line with the Euratom
Treaty.
Turkey has declared its intention to issue a national report on the stress tests at its first
nuclear power plant (NPP) at Akkuyu to allow for the preparation of a pending peer review.
During the 2018 EU-Turkey technical energy dialogue, the EU invited Turkey to participate
in similar peer reviews. Turkey has been invited to attend the European Nuclear Safety

                                               80
 Regulators Group (ENSREG) as an observer, in preparation for stress tests and to facilitate
common approaches on nuclear safety and waste management, but has not yet confirmed its
participation. There is a need of additional legal and technical assurance that the Turkish
nuclear power plants will be constructed, commissioned, and operated safely and in line with
the Euratom Treaty and EU secondary legislation. Additionally, Turkey has not yet acceded
to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
Radioactive Waste Management, and is not yet a member of the European Community
Urgent Radiological Information Exchange system.
5.16.    Chapter 16: Taxation
EU rules on taxation cover value added tax and excise duties as well as aspects of corporate
taxation. They also deal with cooperation between tax administrations, including the
exchange of information to prevent tax evasion.
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of taxation. Some progress was made in this
area notably through the removal of the regional headquarters regime, amendments to the
technology development zones regime and progress with the 2009 action plan on excise duty
of alcoholic beverages. Turkey has also ratified the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters
and has signed the Multilateral Competent Authority Agreement – in the context of the
OECD Automatic Exchange of Information standard. Not all of last year’s recommendations
were sufficiently addressed, however, and so in addition to addressing the shortcomings set
out below, in the coming year Turkey should:
 align the range of excisable energy products with the acquis;
 tackle the deficiencies identified by the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of
  Information.
Indirect taxation
As regards indirect taxation, a wide the range of products is subject to a 1% value added tax,
deviating from the acquis (a 15% minimum rate is standard although member states can apply
reduced rates of VAT to certain goods and services). Legislation on structure, exemptions,
special schemes and the scope of reduced rates need to be further aligned with the acquis.
On excise duties, the specific duty on imported and blended tobacco, which was imposed at
$150 per tonne and used to finance the Tobacco Fund, has been removed, in line with the
2009 action plan. Turkey’s cigarette excise duties legislation contradicts the acquis in terms
of the specific and ad valorem elements of the tax, but the overall level of excise duties on
cigarettes is close to EU levels. Regarding alcoholic beverages, Turkey has removed the
taxation differentials in absolute terms between raki (mainly domestically produced) and
certain other alcoholic beverages (mainly imported) in compliance with the 2009 action plan.
Excise duties on energy products are generally well above the EU minimum rates, but
kerosene, coal and electricity are not subject to excise duties, contrary to the acquis. The
regular practice of introducing temporary tax cuts and restructuring public debts is
detrimental to voluntary tax compliance in Turkey.
Direct Taxation
In direct taxation, the Council of the European Union Code of Conduct Group has evaluated
Turkey’s preferential tax regimes and has assessed the technology development zone and
regional headquarters regimes as being potentially harmful. In the context of the
commitments made by Turkey to respond to the December 2017 Council Conclusions on the

                                             81
 list of non-cooperative jurisdictions for tax purposes, Turkey has repealed the regional
headquarters regime from 2019 and has set an end-of-2021 deadline for the vested rights.
Turkey has also amended the technology development zone regime.
Administrative cooperation and mutual assistance
The Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters (MAC) entered into
force in July 2018. The MAC requires the parties’ competent authorities to mutually agree on
the scope of the automatic exchange of information and the procedures to be complied with.
Turkey is also committed to the OECD Automatic Exchange of Information standard, and
signed the Multilateral Competent Authority Agreement in 2017. In the context of the
December 2017 EU Council conclusions on the list of non-cooperative jurisdictions for tax
purposes, Turkey also committed to implementing the automatic exchange of information
with all EU Member States by the end of 2019.
Operational capacity and computerisation
Regarding operational capacity and computerisation, the Revenue Administration remained
affiliated to the Ministry of Treasury and Finance within the scope of the presidential system
and maintained its mandate. The e-invoice system was used by 72 000 taxpayers in 2017.
Efforts to establish an integrated public finance management information system are ongoing.
5.17.   Chapter 17: Economic and monetary policy
EU rules require the independence of central banks and prohibit them from directly financing
the public sector. Member States coordinate their economic policies and are subject to fiscal,
economic and financial surveillance.
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of economic and monetary policy. There has
been backsliding during the reporting period, because of increased political pressure on the
central bank, undermining its independence and credibility. Deadlines for the submission of
fiscal notifications are not always respected. There was no implementation of the 2018
report's recommendations.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should:
→ avoid any political interference undermining the independence of the central bank.
On monetary policy, significant further progress is needed to ensure the independence of the
central bank. The inflation target is determined jointly by the central bank and the
government. There has been increasing political pressure on the central bank (e.g. the public
comments of the President of the Republic to lower borrowing costs and to fight inflation
through lower interest rates), thus undermining its operational and institutional independence.
As regards personal independence, under the new presidential system, the Governor and
Vice-Governors are now directly appointed by the President of the Republic, while the
members of the Board of the Monetary Policy Committee are subject to his approval. On the
other hand, Turkey made some progress in terms of simplifying its monetary policy by
setting back the one-week repo rate as the main policy rate, but switched to providing all
funding through other channels at two instances. Further work should be done to ensure full
alignment with the acquis in relation to privileged access to financial institutions by the
public sector.
On economic policy, significant further alignment with the Directive on Requirements for
Budgetary Frameworks is needed. Turkey revised its national account system to better
comply with the European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA-2010).
However, further efforts would be required to align fiscal reporting and notifications under

                                              82
 the excessive deficit procedure with ESA 2010. Further improvements are also needed to
ensure the credibility of macroeconomic forecasts. Turkey does not have numerical fiscal
rules or a fiscal council that monitors fiscal policy independently, as is required by the
Directive. Turkey continues to submit fiscal notifications twice per year, although not always
by the set deadlines.
The 2019-2021 Economic Reform Programme (ERP) was formally submitted on 26 February
2019, with almost a one month delay. Following the transition to the new presidential system,
the central coordination of the ERP was given this year to the newly established Presidency’s
Strategy and Budget Directorate. The structural reform priority measures are better specified
than last year, although the quality of these measures in terms of description, timeline,
estimated impact and risks could be improved.
5.18.    Chapter 18: Statistics
EU rules require that Member States are able to produce statistics based on professional
independence, impartiality, reliability, transparency, and confidentiality. Common rules are
provided for the methodology, production and dissemination of statistical information.
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of statistics. Turkey has continued to make good
progress in terms of integrating the administrative records of public institutions into the
national accounting system. Some progress has also been achieved in the area of agricultural
and migration statistics. However, further efforts are needed to align macroeconomic
statistics with the EU acquis.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, in the coming year Turkey should
continue to:
 improve compliance with the European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA
  2010);
 improve coordination between TurkStat and other data providers, while improving the
  quality and use of administrative records;
 improve statistics on agriculture and migration.
As regards statistical infrastructure, the statistics legislation is based on the principles of
the European Statistics Code of Practice, and it ensures the professional independence of the
Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat). However, a presidential decree adopted in July 2018
shortened the mandate of the President of TurkStat and changed the appointment procedures
of senior officials. The President of TurkStat is appointed directly by the President of the
Republic, while the appointment of the vice-presidents and heads of departments is also
subject to his approval. There are certain concerns regarding the transparency of appointment
and dismissal processes within TurkStat. Important efforts have been made to integrate the
administrative records of public institutions into statistical production. Closer cooperation
between TurkStat and some of the main data providers will help to improve the quality of
registers and increase the use of administrative data.
For macroeconomic statistics, the GDP data were revised to ensure greater compliance with
the European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010) at the end of 2016.
Turkey continues its efforts to integrate the administrative records of public institutions into
the national accounting system. The GNI inventory submitted to Eurostat in 2017 represents a
substantial improvement compared to the earlier version, but needs to be further aligned with
Eurostat’s GNI Inventory Guide. Turkey produces highly compliant statistics on international
trade in goods. In November 2018, Turkey submitted to Eurostat tables for the excessive

                                              83
 deficit procedure for 2014-2017. The harmonised index of consumer prices is highly
compliant with the EU acquis.
On business statistics, implementation of the regulation on structural business statistics is
still ongoing. TurkStat has started to use administrative records to produce indicators related
to short-term and structural business statistics. Short-term statistics are largely aligned, with
the exception of services. Innovation, ICT and full data sets for R&D statistics are produced
and sent to Eurostat. Rail, maritime and regional transport statistics are compliant and work is
ongoing for road freight and passenger mobility data. Tourism statistics are also available.
As for social statistics, data from the income and living conditions survey is available and
labour market statistics are fully aligned with the EU acquis. The methodology for
employment data follows EU practice. Data are available for education and vocational
training. There is good compliance in public health statistics for data related to health surveys
and causes of death, while further progress is needed for data on health expenditure and non-
monetary healthcare. Social protection statistics are highly compliant. Crime statistics are
produced, but they have not yet been transmitted to Eurostat. There was progress on
migration statistics. Statistics on immigration and emigration were published using
administrative registers for the first time in September 2018, and sent to Eurostat. The data
cannot be published by Eurostat because of definitional problems.
As regards agricultural statistics, no agricultural census has been carried out since 2001.
Crop, animal production, milk and dairy statistics are available. Supply balance sheets are
available for almost all basic crop products and for wine. Work is ongoing for the economic
accounts for agriculture and the agricultural input price index. Turkey carried out a farm
structure survey in 2016 to determine the physical sizes of the agricultural holdings. Turkstat
published the results of the survey in April 2018, but the microdata and the methodological
report have not been sent to Eurostat.
As for environmental statistics, waste statistics are available, but further progress is needed
for data on agricultural and construction waste. Environmental accounts on greenhouse gas
emissions, environmental taxes, material flow, energy and environmental protection
expenditure are available. Energy statistics are in line with the EU acquis. Good quality
statistics on energy prices are available and are sent regularly to Eurostat.
5.19.    Chapter 19: Social policy and employment
EU rules in the social field include minimum standards for labour law, equality, health and
safety at work and non-discrimination. They also promote social dialogue at European level.
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of social policy and employment. There
has been no progress during the past year, especially in employment policy. In the coming
year, Turkey should in particular:
 remove obstacles which limit the enjoyment of trade union rights and reinvigorate the
  bilateral and tripartite social dialogue;
 oversee the implementation of health and safety at work legislation for the benefit of the
  entire labour force;
 promote women’s employment by stepping up appropriate work-life balance policies.
In labour law, Turkey is moderately prepared. Labour law is still not applicable to
agriculture and forestry workplaces with fewer than 50 employees, or to domestic workers,
except for matters involving occupational health and safety. This, coupled with high rates of
informality, means that a high proportion of the working population is not protected by the

                                               84
 labour law. The current number of the labour inspectors is well below the benchmarks set by
the International Labour Organisation, as critical for the enforcement of the labour law.
Mediation (mandatory before resorting to labour courts) has started functioning. The national
programme for the elimination of child labour for 2017- 2023 has been launched, but no
official data has been released on its implementation.
On health and safety at work, the EU framework directive has been largely transposed,
except the requirement that low-risk enterprises with fewer than 50 employees utilise
occupational health and safety professionals. This provision will enter into force in July 2020.
Occupational accidents claimed at least 1,636 lives in 2017, up from 1,405 in 2016, with the
construction sector causing the highest number of fatalities. The fatal accident rate per
number of persons employed (“incident rate”) has also increased. Migrant children are
particularly vulnerable to work-related accidents. The low level of union density, high levels
of informality and extensive subcontracting of work in the private sector are factors that
increase risks to employees’ safety. The high number of occupational incidents and fatalities
at the new Istanbul airport site, the largest construction site in Turkey, attracted public
attention with mass worker protests in September 2018. Turkey needs to improve its
prevention, identification and reporting systems for occupational fatalities and diseases and
implement a proper system of labour inspection.
Social dialogue has backslid during the last year. The members of the Economic and Social
Council, which has not convened since 2009, will now be appointed by the President of the
Republic. The tripartite consultative committee, which has continued to be the main tripartite
social dialogue forum, convened once in 2018. Trade union density among registered private-
sector employees was 13.8% in January 2019. Trade union density among the 2.47 million
public servants is high at 67.6%, although it has been decreasing since 2016. Managers and
members of some unions continued to face arbitrary dismissal, harassment and detention for
various union activities of a peaceful nature. Sixty-two workers, including one union leader,
are on trial because of their involvement in mass worker protests against poor working
conditions at the new Istanbul airport construction site. These and other breaches of
fundamental labour rights as the freedom of association and the right for collective
bargaining have raised the attention of the International Labour Organisation (ILO). The list
of public institutions whose employees are not allowed to organise in unions, already long by
international standards, has been further expanded. Mass dismissals of public servants for
alleged links to terrorist groups, in relation to the coup attempt of 2016, have continued. The
State of Emergency Appeal Commission, which is mandated to examine dismissals of public
servants, still has a large backlog of unresolved cases for those affected by measures under
the state of emergency (see section Measures under the state of emergency).
In 2018, two strike actions in the private sector were postponed (and de-facto banned) by the
Government. Meanwhile, the Constitutional Court has ruled that a 2015 decision to postpone
a metal sector strike, imposed by the Government on the grounds of national security, was in
breach of the right to strike.
In 2018, the overall employment rate was 52.0%, 32.2% for women. The unemployment rate
was 11%. The labour force participation rate was 58.5%, with an increase in female labour
force participation from 37.6% in 2017 to 38.3% in 2018. Of employed women, 23% work as
unpaid family workers in agriculture. The youth unemployment rate was 20.3%: a decrease
from 20.8 % in 2017. While there is a minor decrease in the number of females not in
employment, education or training in the age group 15-24 from 34.0 % in 2017 to 33.6 % in
2018, there is an increase for males from 14.6% in 2017 to 15.6% in 2018. In 2018, the rate
of employees/employers not registered to any social security institution reached 33.6%.

                                              85
 Approximately 800 000 Syrian refugees are employed largely in the informal sector. 43.4%
of women are in undeclared jobs with this rate climbing to 90.8% for women in agriculture.
Turkey has set concrete targets for the labour market, demonstrating long-term policy
making. No official figures for employment have been announced following the
“employment mobilisation programme” launched in 2016 to create two million jobs,
primarily by covering employers’ share of social security contributions and to encourage
registration. As was the case last year, the majority of the job placements continued to be in
occupations not requiring any qualifications. People with disabilities face difficulties getting
a foothold on the labour market and large gender inequalities exist. A major part of the
unemployment insurance fund was used for employment subsidy programmes to employers,
and the impact of this is yet to be evaluated.
Turkey has a good level of preparation for using the European Social Fund. The Ministry of
Family, Labour and Social Services manages similar sectoral funds under IPA and IPA II
programmes, covering areas of employment, education, lifelong learning and social inclusion.
(concerning the effectiveness of the management of IPA funds, see chapter 22 – Regional
Policy and Structural Instruments).
In social inclusion and protection, Turkey has continued to provide a wide range of public
and social services to 3.9 million registered refugees, who are predominantly Syrian nationals
placed under ‘temporary protection’. Income inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient
remained stable, but with 0.426 was higher than for all EU Member States. The income-
quintile ratio (another common reference for inequality) stands at 8.6 (EU 5.2), and
substantiates the same tendency. Turkey has no policy framework for poverty reduction.
Social protection expenditures represented 12.3% of GDP in 2017. Participation of persons
with disabilities in Turkey’s economy and society remains a challenge, the main issues being
limited enforcement of anti-discrimination legislation, inadequate physical infrastructure at
workplaces, and lack of affordable occupational therapy services. Implementation of the
Strategy on Roma Citizens needs to be improved, including the preparation, adoption and
implementation of an action plan for 2019-2021, with the involvement of all relevant actors.
Social assistance beneficiaries are referred to the public employment service for employment
or active labour market measures. There has been little progress in moving from institutional
to community-based care for vulnerable persons. Home-based care subsidies for vulnerable
children and persons with disabilities are expanding. Quality standards, monitoring,
inspection and evaluation of all care services need to be improved.
Turkey has no strategy or action plan for non-discrimination in employment and social
policy. The human rights and equality body has started processing complaints and its
capacity needs to be strengthened. Public awareness needs to be raised about rights and
responsibilities in this field. A survey revealed that more than 80% of young Syrian migrants
perceive discrimination in the labour market. The legislative framework does not prohibit
discrimination on the grounds of sexual identity and orientation. (See Chapter 23 – Judiciary
and fundamental rights).
On equality between women and men in employment and social policy, there have been no
legislative developments in relation to part-time work for working parents in the public
sector. The legislative and institutional mechanisms needed to balance family and working
life as a basic component of all national policies promoting women’s employment are still
lacking. The main source of inequality, and the gender gap, is the low participation of
Turkish women in the workforce. There is a wide gap in the employment rates (38%), labour
force participation rates and unemployment rates of women and men, and a gender pay gap
observed for all levels of educational attainment. The lack of institutions and services

                                              86
 providing care for children, the sick and the elderly people continues to hinder women’s
employment, due to a gender bias in caring responsibilities (See also Chapter 23).
5.20.    Chapter 20: Enterprise and industrial policy
EU enterprise and industrial policy strengthens competitiveness, facilitates structural change
and encourages a business-friendly environment that stimulates small and medium-sized
enterprises.
Turkey has a good level of preparation in the area of enterprise and industrial policy. There
has been good progress on the legal framework for doing business but issues such as tackling
the informal economy, the long-term financing of small and medium-sized enterprises and
the legal framework for microfinance remain challenges.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 improve policy compliance following the results of the Small Business Act report;
 focus on measuring the impact of policy tools.
Enterprise and industrial policy principles
There has been significant progress on the legal framework covering the business
environment. An omnibus law amending other laws to improve the business environment,
published in March 2018, did much to ease the administrative burden on enterprises. This law
and other accompanying measures helped Turkey improve its ranking in the 2019 Doing
Business Index by 17 places making the country one of the top 10 reformers. Following the
transition to the executive presidency system, the Ministry of Industry and Technology
extended its mandate to cover foreign direct investments, incentive schemes for industry, and
regional development including the development agencies set up for the purpose.
Turkey’s efforts to digitalise government services have continued for foreign direct
investments where an electronic incentive implementation and foreign investment
information system was introduced. An e-export strategy and action plan has been adopted
for 2018-2020 to increase exports in e-commerce.
Turkey’s focus on localisation schemes (some of which create obstacles to the free movement
of goods with the EU – see Chapter 1) and the strategic use of public procurement for the
benefit of local industry have continued during the reporting period. Turkey maintained the
scope of the 15% domestic price advantage in public procurement with compulsory use for
medium and high-technology industrial products, contrary to EU rules (see also Chapter 5).
A presidency decision on the industry cooperation programme exempted public contracts
containing de-localisation and technology transfer from public procurement rules. Such steps
and the existing and planned schemes for localisation in sectors such as pharmaceuticals,
medical devices, biotechnological products and agricultural and forestry machinery, are not
compatible with the general principles of the EU common industrial policy. The informal
economy is still substantial and remains a major problem area. The innovation performance is
the weakest in intellectual assets and the employment effect. Evaluations of impact on policy
objectives are not systematically conducted.
Enterprise and industrial policy instruments
The Turkish legislation is not yet fully harmonised with the Late Payment Directive. Turkey
has continued to implement various schemes supporting companies, mainly SMEs. The scope
of schemes of a number of schemes has been further extended to cover a wider range of
beneficiaries and activities. These are schemes for the organisation of sectoral national fairs
and participation in international fairs, market research and market entry, investment supports
                                               87
 for centres of attraction, industry areas, organised industrial zones, technology development
zones, supports for tourism operators and Treasury supports for venture capital funds.
According to a protocol signed in January 2018, further Treasury support of about EUR 9
billion has been made available for SMEs through the Credit Guarantee Fund. Several
technical assistance and financing schemes run by the SME support administration
(KOSGEB) are also operational. Turkey has continued to support technology development
zones. There were 81 of these zones in January 2019 (69 in 2017) with 61 being operational.
In 2018, 1,022 patents had been obtained from 29,503 completed projects (compared with
640 patents from 28,852 projects in the previous reporting period). Turkey remains active in
the COSME programme, the Enterprise Europe Network and in the Small Business Act
assessment process.
5.21.    Chapter 21: Trans-European networks

Turkey is well advanced in the area of trans-European networks, where good progress has
been achieved. The logistics master plan has been finalised. Turkey's role in fostering energy
security in the region and the EU has been strengthened by the completion of the first phase
of the Trans-Anatolian Pipeline project (TANAP), the backbone of the southern gas corridor.
In addition to addressing the shortcomings set out below, Turkey should pay particular
attention in the coming year to:
 accelerating efforts to align with key parts of the acquis to facilitate alignment in TEN-T;
 establish a transparent, cost-reflective and non-discriminatory gas transit regime in line
  with the acquis.

As regards transport networks, Turkey has collected information for the last eight years on
the Trans-European Transport (TEN-T) network, which is now collated on the transport
information management system. The data will be transferred to the TEN-Tec system. Turkey
has provided a firm commitment with an indicative completion target to finalise the railway
connection over the Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge in İstanbul. A joint monitoring board is being
established to oversee and steer the development of railway projects in the Marmara region
which indeed will provide high capacity reliable railway connections in the east-west corridor
and form an important part of the further extension of the TEN-T. The construction of the
Halkalı – Kapıkule railway project, which is co-financed by the EU using IPA II funds, is
expected to start in the first half of 2019. The logistics master plan has been finalised. Turkey
needs to ensure that its transport network projects are implemented in line with the TEN-T
regulatory framework, and upgrade its transport networks in line with the requirements of the
TEN-T Regulation.
As regards energy networks, significant progress has been achieved on gas networks and in
particular on the Trans-Anatolian Pipeline project (TANAP), the backbone of the southern
gas corridor. The completed first phase will bring 6 billion cubic meters of Azeri gas per year
through Georgia to Turkey. The second phase, aiming to deliver ten billion cubic metres of
gas to Europe via Greece, Albania and Italy, is expected to be finalised by June 2019, with
gas arriving in Europe via the Trans-Adriatic pipeline project (TAP) in 2020. Progress has
been made on the TurkStream pipeline project with the completion of its first offshore
section. The construction of the onshore connecting line to the existing transit pipeline of the
Turkish Petroleum Pipeline Corporation's (BOTAŞ) is ongoing. The routing of the second
export line, whose offshore section is under construction, is yet to be determined, the options
being either Greece or Bulgaria. Insufficient progress can be reported on the establishment of
a transparent, cost-reflective and non-discriminatory gas transit regime (See Chapter 15 –

                                               88
 Energy). There has been limited progress on the interconnection between Turkey and
Bulgaria. For electricity networks, Turkey has made progress in aligning with the EU
network codes, fostering network integration and greater capacity of interconnections to
increase efficiency and security of electricity supply.
5.22.    Chapter 22: Regional policy and the coordination of structural instruments
Regional policy is the EU’s main investment policy for sustainable and inclusive economic
growth. Member States bear responsibility for its implementation, requiring adequate
administrative capacity and sound financial management of project design and execution.

Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of regional policy and the coordination of
structural instruments. Overall, there has been no progress in this area, especially in
absorbing IPA II funds and in strengthening capacity for programme implementation.
However, for regional integration and territorial cooperation there has been some
achievement in setting up management and control systems and implementation results
within IPA I. In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 focus on the completion of the ongoing operations under IPA II, in particular the mature
  operations within the existing pipeline, in order to ensure full implementation of EU
  funds by the set deadlines to deliver high quality results and avoid de-commitments;
 ensure effective strategic planning and risk management at the programme level;
 strengthen the capacities of the National IPA Coordinator (NIPAC) and National
  Authorising Officer (NAO) to coordinate Operating Structures (OSs), as well as
  administrative capacities in the field of Regional Policy and coordination of Structural
  Instruments.

No progress has been made in the legislative framework. Mechanisms for evidence-based
policymaking, policy and program evaluations, and impact assessment are not yet in place. It
is not clear how the 2014-2023 National Strategy for Regional Development (NSRD), which
provides a framework for planning on regional and national level, will be enforced in the new
presidential system introduced after the June 2018 elections.
There has been no progress in the institutional framework. All four Operating Structures
(OSs) for IPA Multi-Annual Operational Programmes (MAAPs) have been entrusted with
budget implementation tasks for the management of MAAPs in the IPA II period (2014-20).
However, the functions and responsibilities of the structures in charge of managing IPA II
assistance are still not adequately understood. In addition, Turkey’s transition to an executive
presidential model resulted in a restructuring in the institutional set-up, which has caused
uncertainty for the upcoming period. The role of the NIPAC still remains weak. The
development agencies lack the power and resources to act as engines of development. On the
positive side, a permanent Head of the Audit Authority responsible for auditing of the
functionality and efficient of the management and control mechanisms was appointed in
April 2019.
Administrative capacities have backslid during the year. The line OSs responsible for
MAAPs have experience and capacities to manage procurement procedures and contracts, but
a systematically high staff turnover, a lack of experience enforcement of contractual
conditions and a low ownership by the OSs have led to delays in procurement and
implementation.
There is some progress in programming. Project pipelines have been established by all IPA
structures for the IPA II period (2014-20). Drafting of project documentation is fairly

                                              89
 advanced and procurement is ongoing but at a limited pace. It is important to reduce the
substantial four-year delay between programming and implementation.
On monitoring and evaluation, progress is slow regarding the effective use of the integrated
monitoring information system developed by the Ministry of Development, and there has
been backsliding on a systematic evaluation policy in the context of IPA II funds.
Monitoring of sustainability and financial adjustment applicable to IPA I is not sufficient.
Concerning financial management, control and audit, the de-commitment risk of the IPA
II funds remains high, especially for IPA 2014 funds within MAAPs, which are due in the
end of 2019. OSs still suffer from a lack of capacity for the preparation of tender
documentation and procurement. Efficiently prioritising and organising procurement
processes, ant the follow-up of implementation are key elements in speeding up the
implementation and avoiding de-commitments.
5.25   Chapter 25: Science and research
The EU provides significant support for research and innovation. All Member States can
benefit from the EU’s research programmes, especially where there is scientific excellence
and solid investment in research.

Overall, Turkey’s preparations in science and research are well advanced. Turkey made
good progress notably in e-infrastructures, open data and gender mainstreaming in research.
The cooperation between Turkey and EU is good but there is room for improvement. Last
year recommendations remain valid.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 ensure promotion to research and innovation clusters;
 develop and/or update National strategies and infrastructures in the science, technology
  and innovation sectors;
 reinforce its efforts towards aligning its national research area (TARAL) with the
  European Research Area (ERA) and increase participation in Horizon 2020 and maximise
  its benefits.

On research and innovation policy, the share of R&D expenditure to GDP slightly
increased in 2017 compared with 2016, but remains below 1% (EU28 average is 2%). The
number of researchers per million inhabitants (a third of the European average) is still
limiting Turkey's overall research capacity. The share of female R&D personnel slightly
increased in 2017, compared to 2016 and reached 32% of the total R&D personnel. The
female R&D personnel is highest in higher education (44%), followed by the government
sector (28.6%) and financial and non-financial corporations (25.1%). The New Economic
Program launched in September 2018 has strategic goals in science, technology and
innovation policies and a new Policy Board on Science, Technology and Innovation has been
established. Both measures may have a positive impact in the sector.
On framework programmes, participation in Horizon 2020 is stagnant at a level that is too
low. The figures show that to date, Turkey has been slightly more successful in Horizon 2020
than in the previous FP7 programme but further efforts are still needed. The Horizon 2020
Action Plan prepared by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey
(TUBITAK) to increase and to broaden Turkish participation in Horizon 2020 is welcome
and needs to be quickly implemented. Turkey needs to continue its efforts to align its
National Research Area (TARAL) with the European Research Area (ERA). TARAL

                                             90
 progress is satisfactory and promising to link the ERA into diverse national R&I policies and
ecosystems, however there is still room for improvements as only in some cases a coherent
strategy is presented. Turkey has achieved good results on ERA priorities related to gender
equality and it is encouraged to continue in that direction.
On Innovation Union, Turkey remains a ‘moderate innovator’ according to the European
Innovation Scoreboard for 2018. Performance has increased slightly over recent years, but is
still below EU in most of the indicators. The number of Technology Development Zones – to
better serve cooperation between business and academia grew to 81 in 2018. Research and
innovation clusters, knowledge exchange, mentoring for start-ups and closer cooperation
between academia and industry-SMEs should be promoted in order to increase
commercialisation of RDI products and the number of patents granted.
5.26   Chapter 26: Education and culture
The EU supports cooperation in education and culture through funding programmes and the
coordination of Member State policy through the open method of coordination. The EU and
the Member States must also prevent discrimination and ensure quality education for
children of migrant workers, including those from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Turkey is moderately prepared on education and culture. There has been some progress on
this chapter, notably regarding the national qualifications system. Turkey recognises the
value of culture in development policies and encourages the promotion and protection of its
cultural heritage.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 further improve inclusive education, with a particular focus on girls and children from
  disadvantaged groups and closely monitor and continue work to reduce the proportion of
  school dropouts;
 ensure the good functioning of the Turkish Qualifications Framework;
 take concrete steps to implement of the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and
  Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions.
In the area of education, with a level of public expenditure of 4.3% of the GDP, Turkey is at
an advanced stage of implementing the Bologna process, although significant quality
differences persist among Turkey's 206 universities. Turkey has set up a Higher Education
Quality Board in charge of quality assessment and assurance. A regulation was published in
November 2018 regarding the principles and procedures for Turkey’s quality assurance in
higher education system of Turkey as well as for the management of the Higher Education
Quality Council was published in November 2018. The Board is not yet a member of the
European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education.
The implementation of a national vocational qualifications system by the Vocational
Qualifications Authority (VQA) is ongoing. The VQA, which is the authority responsible for
preparing national occupational standards and national qualifications and authorising of
certification bodies, is also in charge of implementing of the Turkish qualifications
framework (TQF).
In November 2018, 792 national occupational standards were published in the Official
Gazette and 467 qualifications approved. The number of authorised certification bodies
increased from 116 in 2017 to 182 in 2018. Through the exams and skill tests carried out by
these certification bodies, 431 907 individuals have been issued a VQA vocational


                                             91
 qualifications certificate. The principles and procedures on ensuring the quality assurance of
the qualifications to be Included in TQF were published.
Although the TQF now refers to the European qualifications framework, Turkey will have to
ensure that principles and procedures relating to quality assurance, credit systems, inclusion
of qualifications, and validation of non-formal and informal learning are fully in place. In the
formal vocational education and training sector, the implementation of modular curricula and
a credited module system, instead of the current class passing system, remains an important
issue for the effective implementation of the TQF.
An amendment to the Law for Private Education adopted in May 2018 puts on an equal
footing holders of certificates of completed training issued by private education institutions
and holders of certificates following an exam at an accredited vocational qualification
institution. This change undermines efforts made to establish a quality-assured vocational
qualification system in Turkey.
There has been some progress in the net enrolment rate of children, particularly in pre-school
education, which increased from 58.8% in 2017 to 66.9% in 2018. The net enrolment rates in
primary school increased from 91.2% in 2017 to 91.7% in 2018, but fell in lower secondary
school from 95.7% to 94.5% over the same period. In secondary education, the net enrolment
rate increased from 82.5% in 2017 to 83.6% in 2018.
Turkey has been participating in the EU programmes as a candidate country since 2004.
Applications for the Erasmus + programme’s mobility actions further increased from 9 391 in
2017 to 10 578 in 2018, with a budget of nearly EUR 110 million.
For Turkey, quality and inclusiveness are amongst the main priorities as they aim at reducing
disparities between urban and rural areas, increasing the quality of teachers through
continuous professional development and in-service training, reducing gender inequalities,
updating curricula to include transferable skills, etc. Although these efforts are welcome,
based on the latest PISA results Turkey appears at the bottom of the ranking table, suggesting
serious issues with the overall quality of education.
As for culture, following the full entry into force of the presidential system, a Culture and
Arts Council was established under the auspices of the President of the Republic. The
Council is composed of cultural professionals and oversees the implementation of cultural
policies. Pursuant to Turkey's ratification of the 2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions in 2017, the Ministry of Culture and
Tourism contributes to the studies of the Convention's National Committee, but measures
have yet to be taken for its implementation.
Turkey withdrew from the Creative Europe programme in January 2017. Cultural relations
with the EU continue on a bilateral basis and in the EU-Turkey Civil Society Dialogue
programmes funded under the IPA.
Besides active participation in the youth actions of the Erasmus+ programme, there are some
good developments in the field of youth policies, based on the National Youth and Sports
Policy Paper which was adopted in 2013 in line with the European Union Youth Strategy
(2010-2018). This paper includes 20 main policy fields including key topics defined in the
European Union Work Plan for Sport (2017-2020) such as anti-doping, good governance in
the field of sport as well as innovation and social inclusion through the promotion of physical
activity.



                                              92
 5.27   Chapter 27: Environment and climate change
The EU promotes strong climate action, sustainable development and protection of the
environment. EU law contains provisions addressing climate change, water and air quality,
waste management, nature protection, industrial pollution, chemicals, noise and civil
protection.
Turkey has some level of preparation in this area. There has been some progress, mainly in
increasing capacity in waste management and wastewater treatment and legislative
alignment, but enforcement and implementation still remain weak. More ambitious and better
coordinated environment and climate policies need to be established and implemented.
Strategic planning, substantial investment and stronger administrative capacity are required
as well. In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 complete alignment with the directives on water and industrial pollution, and ensure that
  the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive is correctly implemented;
 ensure alignment with the acquis on public participation and the right to access
  environmental information;
 ratify the Paris Agreement on climate change, and start implementing its contribution to
  the Agreement, and complete its alignment with the EU acquis on climate action.
Environment
Turkey has achieved some level of preparation in the area of horizontal legislation.
Implementation of the Directive on infrastructure for spatial information is still at an early
stage. There are concerns on how the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive is
implemented. There are still complaints about the application of the rule of law in court
decisions on environmental issues and about public participation and the right to
environmental information. Turkey is still not a party to the Aarhus Convention. The 2016
law that waived licencing and other restrictions for strategically important investment
projects is a major concern. Procedures for transboundary consultations have not yet been
aligned with the acquis. The Strategic Environmental Assessments Directive is currently
aligned in some sectors. Alignment on environmental liability remains limited.
On air quality, national legislation aligning with the VOC Solvents Emissions Directive was
adopted in 2018. National legislation still needs to be adopted in line with the current
directives on ambient air quality and national emissions ceilings. Severe air pollution in some
cities is reported on an annual basis. Local clean air action plans are being prepared for 64
provinces. A national strategy for air quality monitoring is in place and 7 out of 8 planned
regional networks are operational. Air quality monitoring data is published online.
The legal framework on waste management is mostly aligned. Turkey has adopted a strategy
promoting a zero waste management approach, efficient use of natural resources, landfilling
reduction and increased recycling and reuse. Legislation introducing a ban on the free
distribution of lightweight plastic bags came into force in January 2019 and attracted
substantial public interest. Work has continued to bring waste treatment facilities up to acquis
standards. Alignment and capacity for sorting, recycling and medical waste treatment have
increased. Significant efforts are necessary to implement waste management plans at local
and regional level. Economic instruments to promote recycling and the prevention of waste
generation are improving, but remain limited.
In the area of water quality, the level of alignment is advanced. Over 30% of water bodies
were identified as sensitive areas. The preparation of management plans for four river basins

                                              93
 out of 25 has been completed. Transboundary consultations on water issues are still at an
early stage. Wastewater treatment capacity has increased as a result of continuous
investments. Alignment with the Marine Strategy and Bathing Water Directives is still
pending.
The framework legislation on nature protection, the national biodiversity strategy and an
action plan have yet to be adopted. Regulations allowing planning and construction in
wetlands, forests and natural sites are still not in line with the acquis. The lists of habitats and
species detected in Turkey under the Habitats and Birds Directives have been prepared. The
institutional framework for managing future Natura 2000 sites needs to be streamlined and
adequately resourced. Investments, particularly in hydropower and mining, need to comply
with nature protection obligations, especially for potential Natura 2000 areas.
In industrial pollution and risk management, alignment with most EU directives and
regulations is at an early stage. There is good alignment with the Seveso II Directive and the
ecolabel regulation was adopted in 2018. Alignment with the Seveso III Directive, Industrial
Emissions Directive, the eco-management and audit scheme, and the Paints Directive are still
pending.
On chemicals, legislation on persistent organic pollutants was adopted in 2018. The
legislation on the import and export of dangerous chemicals is yet to be adopted. The
adoption of a regulatory framework to implement the Directive on the protection of animals
used for scientific purposes has advanced.
Alignment with legislation on noise is well advanced. Preparation of noise mapping and local
noise action plans are at an advanced stage.
Turkey has still not established the Common Emergency Communication and Information
System (CECIS) since it joined the Union Civil Protection mechanism in 2016. Although
required by the latter, Turkey has not yet submitted a summary of their national assessment.
Climate change
There was no progress in this area over the previous period. A national strategy consistent
with the EU 2030 climate and energy framework has not yet been formulated, and
mainstreaming of climate action into other sector policies is still weak. The existing national
strategy and action plan only partially addresses climate change mitigation and only for the
short-term. Turkey has still not ratified the Paris Agreement on climate change. Regarding its
commitments under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Turkey submitted
its third biennial report on greenhouse gasses in January 2018. The latest national inventory
was submitted in April 2018.
Turkey is not yet aligned with the Emission Trading Directive. Legislation aligning with the
EU’s economy-wide greenhouse gas monitoring mechanism still needs to be adopted. Further
efforts need to be made to fully implement the legislation aligned with the Fuel Quality
Directive and to initiate alignment on emissions standards for new cars. Turkey also needs to
establish an alignment plan for the Carbon Capture and Storage Directive.
5.28   Chapter 28: Health and consumer protection
EU rules protect consumers in relation to product safety, dangerous imitations and liability
for defective products. The EU also ensures high common standards for tobacco control,
blood, tissues, cells and organs, patients’ rights and communicable diseases.
There is a good level of preparation for legislative alignment of consumer and health
protection. There has been some progress on legislative alignment and the establishment of

                                                94
 structures needed to implement the EU public health acquis. Previous recommendations have
not been fully implemented.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 ensure effective protection of consumers by better enforcement and better coordination of
  and cooperation with consumer groups;
 increase its institutional/administrative capacity, inter-sectoral cooperation, financial
  resources and appropriate diagnostic facilities to address public health issues at central
  and provincial level.
Consumer protection
National legislation is aligned with the EU acquis on consumer protection in non-safety
related issues, though enforcement, consumer awareness, coordination and cooperation with
sectoral stakeholders remain insufficient. Within the Ministry of Trade, the Directorate
General for Consumer Protection and Market Surveillance conducted market surveillance
inspections pursuant to the Law on the Protection of Consumers.
In 2018, Turkey re-organised the town-based consumer arbitration committees and reduced
them from 1 011 to 211 for cost-efficiency reasons. The Directorate General for Consumer
Protection initiated a distance-learning programme for arbitration committees. Also in 2018,
a strategy for the protection of financial consumers was adopted.
Turkey continued to improve its product safety and market surveillance regime. However, the
number of complaints has remained quite high. Consumer information and awareness,
especially concerning investment frauds promising a high profit, remains a matter of concern.
Turkey has continued to improve its online services and organise training and awareness
raising activities, in particular on product safety. Consumer judges and some arbitration
committee members were also trained on EU consumer policy and EU best practices, though
the quality of the decisions of arbitration committees in terms of common legal understanding
and well-justified decisions needs to be improved. The time it takes for an arbitration
committee to reach a decision is very long (one year on average, contrary to the six-month
legal deadline). The impartiality of expert witnesses in consumer conflicts is not always
ensured. Inconsistency between the decisions of different arbitration committees and
consumer courts on very similar consumer complaints remains a systemic problem. There is
weak participation by consumer organisations in policymaking and decision-making
mechanisms. Co-operation in the consumer protection sector involving all stakeholders needs
to be improved. Overall, more political commitment and willingness in the area of consumer
protection is needed.
Public Health
With regard to public health, the re-organisation of the Ministry of Health has continued
with the aim of creating administrative structures to address public health issues at central
and provincial levels.
In tobacco control, Turkey has achieved major legislative advances during the past two
decades. Tobacco use has been reduced considerably and indoor air quality has been
improved. However, smoking prevalence is still high and increasing (31.5%) and some
violations of indoor smoking bans continue. The mean age of starting smoking is 18.1 years
(17.2 years for men and 20.2 years for women). An updated strategy document and action
plan on tobacco control (2018-2023) is in place. The plan focuses on provisions that reduce
demand for tobacco, availability for children and young people, and supply in general.

                                             95
 Turkey ratified the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Protocol on Illicit Trade in
April 2018. Moreover, a provision in the omnibus law, passed in November 2018 and
effective as from June 2019, introduced plain tobacco packaging to regulate the retail
packaging and appearance of tobacco products.
The fight against smoking is considered the first step in prevention of lung cancer.
According to the Lung Cancer Report, the economic burden of lung cancer is estimated at
around TRY 8.8 billion and there are more than 175 000 new cases of cancer each year.
Cancer registry centres have been established in every province. However, Turkey is not part
of the European Network of Cancer Registries.
Despite intensive awareness raising campaigns on nutrition, physical activity and the
reduction and prevention of alcohol-related harm in Turkey, fruit and vegetable consumption
remains low, with almost 88% of men and women consuming fewer than five servings of
fruit and vegetables per day, thus exposing them to higher risk of non-communicable
diseases. Moreover, 81.3% (70.1% of males and 92.2% of females) are not involved in any
effective physical activity and 64.4% are overweight. The high levels of risk factors for non-
communicable diseases require immediate action, as they are responsible for 87% of all
deaths and 18% of adult premature deaths in Turkey. A multi-sectoral action plan on non-
communicable diseases for 2017–2025 is in place.
Regarding blood, tissues, cells and organs capacity building of the blood bank system is
ongoing. There are now 18 regional blood banks, which has led to a reduction in the number
of temporary blood banks by Ministry of Health. There are 37 establishments which collect
blood in Turkey. No progress can be reported on alignment of tissues, cells and organ
legislation and the operation of the heamovigilance system.
For communicable diseases and serious cross border threats to health, the early warning
response and epidemiological surveillance systems demonstrated that they operate effectively
during the anthrax cases that Turkey faced in August. Standard operating procedures for
coordination between the health sector and other sectors are considered to have been tested
successfully on a larger scale. Laboratory services have also proved to support the
surveillance system efficiently.
Turkey has the highest rate of antibiotic resistance among OECD countries. The average
resistance proportion is about 35%, which is seven times higher than European countries with
the lowest proportions. A new electronic prescription system is in place to monitor and
control the use of antibiotics.
On mental health, the number of community-based mental health centres has increased to
167 from 163. Although the suicide rate in Turkey is lower than in most European countries,
it has started to become a significant public health problem with a 50% increase in the
number of people who committed suicide in the last four decades.
According to the Ministry of Interior, there has been a sharp decrease in the number of drug-
induced deaths (228 for the first 9 months of 2018, down from 1020 in 2017). This is linked
to the effective functioning of the national coordination mechanisms on preventing drug
abuse through the control of supply and demand. Drug addicts are offered better
rehabilitation and information through awareness campaigns. In addition, access to drugs is
being reduced by removing distribution and consumption locations, along with the fight
against illicit trade.
As concerns health access inequalities, there is no data available on the level of healthcare
services for people with disabilities, people living with HIV, and children and adults who use
drugs.

                                             96
 5.29. Chapter 29: Customs union
All Member States are part of the EU customs union and follow the same customs rules and
procedures. This requires legislative alignment, adequate implementing and enforcement
capacity, and access to the common computerised customs systems.
Turkey maintains a good level of preparation for the customs union. Some progress has
been made concerning the rules on managing tariff quotas during the reporting period. Duty
relief, free zones and surveillance measures are not fully in line with the acquis or with
Turkey’s obligations under the Customs Union.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 further improve risk-based controls and simplified procedures in line with the acquis to
  facilitate legitimate trade, while ensuring security and safety;
 eliminate import and export restrictions hampering the effective free movement of goods.
There has been some progress on customs legislation, particularly concerning the rules on
management of tariff quotas. The level of alignment remains generally high. However, the
customs law is yet to be harmonised with the EU Customs Code. Gaps remain for
improvement of risk-based controls and simplified procedures in line with the acquis to
facilitate legitimate trade, while ensuring security and safety.
As for the rules on management of tariff quotas, a new allocation method was introduced
enabling that the requests could be made in the customs declaration automatically.
Furthermore, the limitations as regards allocation of tariff quotas for the processed
agricultural products were removed.
Rules on surveillance, free zones and duty relief are yet to be aligned with the acquis while
some exemptions were introduced regarding the surveillance on imports of a few products
(electric accumulators, PVC floor coverings, malleable pipe fittings and parts for lifts) on the
basis of origin. Additional duties applied on imports of a large number of products
originating in third countries were not removed infringing the fundamental principle of the
Customs Union as those duties apply to products of third country origin even though they
were in free circulation in the EU (See also Chapter 1 – Free movement of goods). Turkey
has not wholly removed the export restrictions on certain leather products in violation of the
Customs Union rules. Designation of specialised customs offices and proof of origin
requirements for goods in free circulation in the EU are not in line with Customs Union rules.
Turkey's increased duty on sweet corn is disproportionally high contrary to Customs Union
rules.
On administrative and operational capacity, efforts to strengthen the customs enforcement
capacity have continued in relation to intellectual property rights. However, further alignment
with the acquis in this area is required. Further efforts are needed to improve risk-based
controls to enforce safety and security measures. Unlike the computerised transit system
which Turkey has been implementing as part of its membership of the Convention on a
Common Transit Procedure, tariff IT systems (TARIC, Surveillance) remain to be
operational. A strategy bringing together IT activities with business initiatives has been
prepared and adopted.
5.30. Chapter 30: External relations
The EU has a common trade and commercial policy towards third countries, based on
multilateral and bilateral agreements and autonomous measures. There are also EU rules in
the field of humanitarian aid and development policy.

                                              97
 Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of external relations. There has been backsliding
in the reporting period. The level of alignment with the Common Customs Tariff (CCT) was
reduced, as Turkey continued to apply additional customs duties and further diverged from
the EU Generalised Scheme of Preferences in breach of the EU-Turkey Customs Union.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 urgently re-align its customs tariff with the CCT;
 complete its alignment with the EU’s Generalised System of Preferences and dual-use
  export control regime.
No progress has been made on the common commercial policy. Turkey has not maintained
its once good level of alignment with the EU common commercial policy despite the
EU-Turkey Customs Union, since it still applies additional duties to a large number of
imported products (See Chapter 29 - Customs Union). Turkey’s deviation from the CCT by
its levy of additional duties has been compounded by its deviation from the EU Generalised
Scheme of Preferences in terms of both countries and products. The intensive use of
safeguard measures remains a cause of concern. Turkey continues to open new investigations
based on weak evidence and use safeguards where more targeted trade defence measures,
such as the anti-dumping instrument, would be more appropriate. There should be closer
coordination between the EU and Turkey within the World Trade Organisation, in particular
on the Doha Development Agenda, and in the OECD and the G-20. On export controls on
dual-use goods, Turkey has not aligned with the EU position on membership of certain
multilateral export control arrangements, such as the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies and the Missile
Technology Control Regime. Alignment is also needed with the EU position on medium and
long-term export credits.
Regarding bilateral agreements with third countries, Turkey is generally aligned with the
terms of EU as regards the terms of free trade agreements it has entered with third countries.
However, it has continued to implement its free trade agreement with Malaysia although the
EU has not yet concluded a similar agreement with this country.
As for development policy and humanitarian aid, official development aid granted by
Turkey has markedly increased to EUR 7.2 billion or 0.95% of Official Donor
Assistance/Gross National Income (ODA/GNI) in 2017, exceeding the 0.7% recommended
by the UN. The assistance was largely directed towards humanitarian support for
Syria-related activities on Turkey’s own territory.
5.31. Chapter 31: Foreign, security and defence policy
Member States must be able to conduct political dialogue under EU foreign, security and
defence policy, to align with EU statements, to take part in EU actions and to apply agreed
sanctions and restrictive measures.
Turkey is moderately prepared in the area of foreign, security and defence policy. Some
progress was made through regular political dialogue on foreign and security policy,
including at ministerial level. The EU and Turkey continued their dialogue on
counterterrorism and on the EU's common security and defence policy. Turkey joined Russia
and Iran in the Astana process about Syria and reached the Sochi deal that prevented another
humanitarian catastrophe. It continued to provide substantial humanitarian assistance to
Syrian refugees and maintained a military presence in Idlib. Turkey also continued to provide
humanitarian and development aid in other regions, including in Afghanistan and to
Rohingya refugees.

                                             98
 In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 take decisive steps to significantly improve its alignment with EU declarations and
  Council decisions on common foreign and security policy.
The political dialogue between the EU and Turkey on foreign and security policy issues
continued at all levels. It benefited from the results achieved through the successful joint
implementation of the EU-Turkey Statement of March 2016. A high-level political dialogue
took place in November 2018, where a number of foreign policy issues were discussed in
detail. Ministerial level contacts have been constant, especially on Syria. Political Directors’
meetings took place in February and October 2018. Discussions focussed mainly on
developments in the Middle East and North Africa region (Syria, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Saudi
Arabia and the Gulf, Israel and Palestine and the Middle-East Peace Process) but also on
Russia, Ukraine, South Caucasus, Central Asia, the Western Balkans and on key international
developments (Rohingya, Jerusalem). Turkey attended a number of conferences organised or
supported by the EU on the Black Sea region (fisheries), Palestine/Gaza, Gambia, Somalia
and the Sahel region, as well as the Brussels II Conference on Syria at the level of Deputy
Prime Minister. The Foreign Minister represented Turkey in the EU-hosted High Level
Meeting on Syria in the margins of the 73rd session of the UN General Assembly.
Furthermore, a political dialogue between the EU and Turkey on UN issues took place in
October 2018.
(See Political criteria — Regional issues and international obligations - for more information
on developments in bilateral relations with other enlargement countries and EU Member
States.)
The institutional framework enabling Turkey’s participation in the common foreign and
security policy (CFSP) and security and defence policy (CSDP) is in place. Turkey voiced
support for the overall objectives in the Global strategy for the European Union’s Foreign and
Security Policy. During the reporting period from beginning of March 2018 until end of
February 2019, Turkey aligned, when invited, with 16 out of 87 relevant High Representative
declarations on behalf of the EU and Council decisions, representing an alignment rate of
around 18 %.Turkey has not yet signed the statute of the International Criminal Court nor the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Turkey has held the Chairmanship of the Organisation
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Summit since April 2016.
The ‘Operation Olive Branch’ led by Turkish forces and the Free Syrian Army's ended in
March 2018 with the expulsion of the Democratic Union Party/People's Protection Units
(PYD/YPG), which Turkey regards as a terrorist organisation linked to the PKK, from Afrin
in north-western Syria. The Turkish government said it would withdraw from Syria only once
a political solution is reached.
Turkey aimed at advancing its interests in Syria through its participation in the Astana talks
involving top political, military and intelligence officials from Turkey, Russia and Iran. In
September 2018 Presidents Erdoğan and Putin agreed on the Sochi Memorandum on Idlib in
Syria, avoiding a full-scale attack of the Syrian regime on Idlib and a likely humanitarian
disaster. In pursuance of the agreement, Turkey worked to remove heavy armaments and
radical terrorist groups from a demilitarised zone in Idlib. Turkey continues to support the
National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, based in Istanbul, and
hopes that by entrenching the opposition's presence in Idlib it can strengthen the hand of the
opposition delegation at the UN-led Geneva talks and the planned Constitutional Committee
agreed at Sochi in January 2018. Turkey continued to provide extensive humanitarian
assistance to more than 3.6 million Syrian refugees on its soil. Turkey has upgraded

                                              99
 infrastructure in the opposition-held areas in northern Syria and reports that more than
360 000 Syrians have returned to these areas from Turkey and elsewhere.
Turkey’s relations with Iraq's government developed in a context marked by uncertainties
after the elections held in Iraq. Turkey pledged to provide $5 billion at the Kuwaiti
International Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq held in February 2018, which would be
allocated to reconstruction projects to be defined when security conditions are met. Ankara
continued to develop its relations with the leaders of the Kurdistan Regional Government
(KRG) administration. Turkey continued to conduct air strikes against camps run by the PKK
and its affiliates in the Qandil Mountain and expressed increased concern about other camps
run by the PKK in Sinjar and Mahmur. Turkey succeeded to maintain a military presence in
Iraq with the camp of Bashiqa, in the hope of finding a long-term agreement with Iraqi
authorities with a view to institutionalising it. Turkey expressed much concern about attacks
targeting Turkmen living in northern Iraq and brought the wounded to Turkey for medical
treatment.
Relations with the USA reached a new low in the summer of 2018 with the imposition of new
trade tariffs and sanctions on two Turkish Ministers in connection with the detention of
Pastor Brunson, who was released in October 2018. There are still numerous serious irritants,
including US support for the Syrian Democratic Forces in north-eastern Syria, the long
standing request for the extradition of Fetullah Gülen, expected penalties on Halkbank for the
alleged breach of sanctions on Iran, as well as US policy on Palestine.
Turkey and Russia intensified dialogue and cooperation, in particular on the Syrian conflict.
Bilateral cooperation developed in strategic fields such as energy and defence: Russia
confirmed the supply of a S-400 air defence system to Turkey, which the latter said would
not harm cooperation with NATO. Yet, the US opposed the deal and floated possible
sanctions against Turkey in case the deal would be implemented. Russian sanctions, which
had been imposed following the downing of a Russian jet by the Turkish army in late 2015,
were lifted and relations were normalised. Presidents Erdoğan and Putin met repeatedly in the
course of the reporting period, including on the occasion of the launch of the construction of
the nuclear plant Akkuyu – a project worth $ 20 billion – near Mersin in April 2018. The
construction of the Turkstream pipeline took full speed.
Relations with Ukraine developed, including in the defence industry sector, and progress is
being made on a possible future Free Trade Agreement between Turkey and Ukraine. While
reiterating its condemnation of Russia’s "illegal annexation of Crimea" and support to the
"rebels" in the Donbass region, and its concerns over the living conditions and human rights
of Tatars in Crimea, Turkey did not align itself with relevant Council decisions, including EU
restrictive measures relating to Russia and Ukraine.
Turkey reacted strongly to the murder of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi at the Saudi
Arabia (KSA) Consulate in Istanbul. Turkey invited the UN Special Rapporteur on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions to collect evidence during a mission in
Istanbul and Ankara in January/February 2019. While pressing for an international
investigation, it kept the dialogue open with Saudi authorities. Ankara supported EU moves
to safeguard the international agreement on the Iranian nuclear plan (Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action) and announced its intention not to abide by US sanctions on Iran even though
it received a temporary waiver to continue importing Iranian crude. Turkey continued to
provide humanitarian and development assistance to Afghanistan. Turkey encouraged UN
political and humanitarian initiatives regarding Yemen.



                                             100
 Turkey continued to increase its engagement in Libya. Relations with Egypt did not
improve, despite Turkey proposing to Egypt to relaunch some form of bilateral consultations.
Turkey and Israel withdrew their ambassadors mid-May 2018, after Turkey criticised Israel
for the killing of Palestinians in Gaza. Turkey continued to express strong opposition to the
US administration’s recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and the move of the US
Embassy to Jerusalem. Turkey criticised the withdrawal of US funding for the United Nations
Agency for the Palestinian Refugees (UNRWA) and pledged to increase its funding at a
meeting held in New York in September 2018 on the margins of the UN General Assembly
as well as to raise the international community's awareness on UNRWA's financial situation.
Regarding South Caucasus and Central Asia, Turkey continued to engage closely with
Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Turkmenistan, through its trilateral dialogue mechanisms on
foreign policy, transport and energy. Turkey took note of Armenian President Sargsyan's
decision in March 2018 to declare the two protocols with Turkey on the normalisation of
bilateral relations "null and void"; the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs said soon after that
the two protocols would nevertheless stay on the agenda of the Grand National Assembly of
Turkey, hoping for a future resumption of relations. Turkey worked on developing relations
in particular with Uzbekistan, taking advantage of President Mirziyoyev's accession to
power. Turkey continued to maintain close relations with the countries of the Western
Balkans, in particular by providing financial support to the Office of the High Representative
(OHR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has also developed its cultural, religious and
educational diplomacy in this region.
Turkey has further strengthened its relations with partners in Africa, Asia and, to a lesser
extent, Latin America. Turkey plans to hold a third Turkey-Africa Partnership Summit in
2019 (the two first took place in 2008 and 2014). To develop relations with India was flagged
as a priority but time would be needed to do so as Turkey has privileged its relations with
Pakistan so far, and more recently with Bangladesh, in the wake of the Rohingya
humanitarian crisis. Turkey started to implement humanitarian projects worth $ 51 million in
Bangladesh, in support to Rohingya refugees, but was denied access to beneficiaries in
Myanmar. Turkey continued talks with China on the Belt and Road Initiative. Turkey
participated actively in the MIKTA (Mexico, Indonesia, South Korea, Turkey and Australia)
informal group of global middle power countries.
Turkey continued to participate in all international export control arrangements and
instruments on non-proliferation. It has not yet aligned itself with the EU position on
membership of the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Missile Technology Control Regime (see
Chapter 30 — External relations).
Turkey continued to actively participate in military crisis management operations under the
EU common security and defence policy (CSDP) notably EUFOR ALTHEA in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Turkish participation in the Ukraine and Kosovo missions was suspended after
Turkish seconded staff was withdrawn following the attempted coup of 2016, but Turkey
later expressed its interest in continuing to contribute to these missions and submitted
applications. The issue of EU-NATO cooperation, going beyond the ‘Berlin plus’
arrangements, involving all EU Member States, continues to be unresolved. Turkey continued
to lobby in favour of a reform of the UN Security Council and reiterated its dedication to the
2030 Agenda of the Sustainable Development Goals.
5.32. Chapter 32: Financial control
The EU promotes the reform of national governance systems to enhance managerial
accountability, sound financial management of income and expenditure, and external audit of


                                              101
 public funds. The financial control rules further protect the EU’s financial interests against
fraud in the management of EU funds and the euro against counterfeiting.
Turkey has a good level of preparation on financial control, though backsliding occurred
during the reporting period because the Prime Ministry Inspection Board was abolished, and
no new national anti-fraud coordination service (AFCOS) was assigned to work with the
European Commission. Also, the Turkish Sovereign Wealth Fund (TWF) has remained
outside the scope of the Turkish Court of Accounts, as the TWF is audited by auditors
appointed by the President of the Republic, who is now also the Chairman of the TWF. The
impact of the new presidential system on financial control remains to be further assessed.
Most of the Commission’s recommendations since 2016 have not been implemented, and
remain valid.
In the coming year, Turkey should:
 update the Public Internal Financial Control policy paper and its action plan and ensure
  that a formal coordination, monitoring and reporting framework is put in place for the
  updated action plan;
 ensure systematic and timely implementation of external audit recommendations;
 nominate an AFCOS and re-establish the AFCOS network.
Public internal financial control (PIFC)
The strategic framework is partially in place, but the Public Internal Financial Control
policy paper dates back to 2012. There is no mechanism in place to coordinate
implementation of the reforms and to ensure regular monitoring and reporting on
implementation. Also, as Turkey does not have a strategic framework for public
administration reform in place, it is not clear to what extent all the enabling conditions for
managerial accountability are being addressed. (see also Public administration reform).
The Turkish administration has a uniform management structure that combines elements of
managerial accountability and delegation with results-oriented performance management
system. Further efforts are needed to address harmonisation of legislation, managerial
accountability, including delegation of decision-making responsibilities, and functioning of
internal control. The Public Financial Management and Control (PFMC) Law applies to all
public institutions and sets out the relevant responsibilities of the heads of public institutions,
including managerial duties and the delegation of authority to authorising officers. With the
introduction of the presidential system after the June 2018 elections, the PFMC Law was
amended to reflect the changes in the institutional and administrative structure. Roles and
responsibilities of the relevant institutions have not yet been clearly defined, which may, in
turn, lead to less transparency and weaker accountability. Weaknesses remain in
accountability arrangements with agencies (see also Public administration reform).
The PFMC Law regulates internal control, which functions largely in line with international
standards. The application of risk management is still at an early stage, and irregularity
management and reporting are yet to be further developed. Turkey has established a treasury
single account, but the inclusion of local administrations, state owned enterprises and
regulatory and supervisory agencies within its scope raises concerns.
Internal audit practice is regulated in line with international standards in the PFMC Law.
An internal audit manual and a code of ethics are in place, as are manuals prepared by the
central harmonisation unit. Quality review needs to be systematically implemented. There is
generally a lack of data on internal audit planning and implementation of recommendations.

                                               102
 Two central harmonisation units (CHU–IA and CHU-FMC), are in charge of developing
and disseminating methodological guidance, monitoring and reporting on PIFC
implementation. The CHU-FMC does not perform internal control quality reviews and there
is no systematic follow-up of the implementation of audit recommendations.
External audit
The constitutional and legal framework provides the independence of the Turkish Court of
Accounts (TCA). The TCA law is in line with International Organisation of Supreme Audit
Institutions (INTOSAI) standards. It provides for an exhaustive audit mandate and gives the
TCA full discretion in discharging its responsibilities. Concerns exist around fiscal discipline,
transparency and accountability in relation to the Turkish Sovereign Wealth Fund, now
directly affiliated with the President and outside the scope of the Turkish Court of Accounts
(TCA), though it is subject to an independent audit.
The TCA has both audit and judicial functions. There has been a minor increase of staff from
1 414 in 2017 to 1 422 in 2018, including with the number of auditors from 759 to 783.
However, overall institutional capacity was adversely impacted by the emergency decrees,
as 10% of TCA staff were dismissed. The TCA strategic development plan for 2014-2018
needs to be updated. Given the high number of local level budget users, the capacity of the
TCA to audit local administrations, municipal companies and associations needs to be
increased.
The TCA has improved the quality of audit work by adopting performance audit and
regularity audit manuals and by strengthening its training centre. Audit reports largely
comply with international standards. In 2018, the TCA carried out 97 performance audits, in
comparison with 72 performance audits in 2017. The TCA annually submits four audit
reports to parliament (External Audit General Evaluation Report, Accountability General
Evaluation Report, Financial Statistics Evaluation Report, and Report on State Enterprises),
in addition to a statement of general conformity.
Regarding the impact of audit work, the TCA assesses the internal control environment of
audited entities as part of its audit work, and thus contributes to PIFC development. The TCA
reports are analysed by the State Economic Enterprise Commission. The TCA reports are
published online every year, with the exception of those on State Economic Enterprises. The
TCA annual audit report is discussed in the relevant parliamentary committee, but increased
parliamentary scrutiny and follow-up still needs to be ensured. The low number of referrals
for prosecution continues to be of concern. Many TCA recommendations are not
systematically and timely implemented by the audited institutions. A working group between
the TCA and the Ministry of Treasury and Finance is operational and there is a need for a
similar working group with the Turkish Parliament.
Protection of the EU’s financial interests
While Turkey has reached a good level of acquis alignment, it still needs to align its
legislation with the new EU Directive 2017/1371 on the fight against fraud to the Union’s
financial interests by means of criminal law. Following the abolition of the Prime Ministry
Inspection Board in 2018, Turkey is yet to assign a new national anti-fraud coordination
service (AFCOS) to work with the European Commission. An anti-fraud network, involving
other relevant authorities, also needs to be re-established. Turkey also needs to adopt a
national anti-fraud strategy. Turkey should significantly strengthen its cooperation with the
European Commission during investigations, and continue to report irregularities and
suspected fraud cases to the Commission. Turkey has reported 371 cases to the Commission
via an online irregularity management system since 2012, of which 110 cases in 2018.

                                              103
 Turkey needs to continue to develop a solid track record on investigations and the reporting
of irregularities.
Protection of the euro against counterfeiting
Turkey has reached a high level of acquis alignment in this area. Technical analysis of
counterfeit money, including euro banknotes and coins, is carried out by the central bank.
Credit institutions that do not withdraw counterfeits from circulation are subject to financial
penalties. Turkey ensures cooperation with the Commission and the European Central Bank
and takes part in the actions of the Pericles 2020 programme.
5.33. Chapter 33: Financial and budgetary provisions
This chapter covers the rules governing the funding of the EU budget (‘own resources’).
These resources mainly consist of: (i) contributions based on the gross national income of
each Member State; (ii) customs duties; and (iii) a resource based on value-added tax.
Member States must have the appropriate administrative capacity to adequately coordinate
and ensure the correct calculation, collection, payment and control of own resources.
Turkey has some level of preparation in the area of financial and budgetary provisions.
Some progress was made on aligning statistics with EU standards. Solid coordination
structures, administrative capacity and implementing rules will need to be set up in due
course.
In the coming year, Turkey should in particular:
 further align the GNI Inventory with Eurostat’s GNI Inventory Guide.
Basic principles and institutions in the underlying policy areas linked to the application of
the own resources system are already in place (see Chapters 16 – Taxation, 18 – Statistics,
29 – Customs union and 32 – Financial control). The Customs Union with the EU on
processed agricultural goods and industrial goods (with the exception of coal and steel
products) continues to ensure considerable alignment of Turkey’s customs legislation with
the customs acquis while a draft customs law aligned with the Union Customs Code is yet to
be adopted. This will facilitate preparation in traditional own resources.
For the value added tax-based resource, preparation is needed to correctly calculate the
statistical VAT base, the weighted average rate and the positive and negative corrections to
offset the impact of derogations from the acquis. Sound measures are needed to combat VAT
and customs duties fraud and to tackle the informal economy.
Concerning the gross national income-based resource, GDP data was revised in December
2016 to achieve greater compliance with the European system of accounts (ESA 2010).
Turkey will need to continue its efforts to ensure its national accounts and GNI calculations
are exhaustive, and take account of the informal economy.
As concerns the administrative infrastructure, Turkey will need to set up a fully
operational coordination structure, with appropriate administrative capacity and
implementing rules, to ensure that it will be able to correctly calculate, forecast, account for,
collect, pay, control and report own resources to the EU in line with the acquis.




                                                104
 ANNEX I – RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EU AND TURKEY
Within the framework of accession negotiations, 16 chapters have been opened so far and
one of these was provisionally closed. In June 2018, the General Affairs Council concluded
that Turkey has been moving further away from the European Union. Turkey's accession
negotiations have therefore effectively come to a standstill and no further chapters can be
considered for opening or closing and no further work towards the modernisation of the EU-
Turkey Customs Union is foreseen. Reforms and developments in Turkey continue to be
monitored by the bodies set up under the Association Agreement. The Association
Committee met in November 2018, while subcommittees kept being held throughout the
reporting period.
The Commission, jointly with the European External Action Service, has maintained EU-
Turkey relations in all key areas of joint interest based on a broad strategic engagement.
Commissioners continued to visit Turkey during the reporting period and there was a
Leaders' meeting between Presidents Juncker and Tusk and President Erdoğan in Bulgaria in
March 2018. High Representative/Vice President Mogherini and Commissioner Hahn took
part in a High Level Political Dialogue with Foreign Minister Çavuşoğlu on 22 November
2018, prepared by a political dialogue at directors' level in October 2018. Regular discussions
on foreign and security policy were held on a wide range of topics and regions including
developments in the Middle East and North Africa region (Syria, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Saudi
Arabia and the Gulf, Israel and Palestine and the Middle-East Peace Process) but also on
Russia, Ukraine, South Caucasus, Central Asia, the Western Balkans and on key international
developments (Rohingya, Jerusalem).
Turkey is the EU’s fifth largest trading partner, while the EU is Turkey’s largest. Two out of
five goods traded by Turkey come from or go to the EU and over 70% of foreign direct
investment in Turkey originates in the EU. A High Level Economic Dialogue was held in
February 2019 in Istanbul, where both parties discussed macroeconomic and investment
developments and engaged with the business community. As part of the Economic Reform
Programme exercise, Turkey participated in the multilateral economic dialogue with the
Commission and Member States held in May 2018 to prepare the country for participation in
multilateral surveillance and economic policy coordination as part of the EU’s Economic and
Monetary Union. The EU and Turkey also continue to coordinate in the framework of the
G-20. Turkey and the EU continued to improve their sectorial cooperation; a High Level
Transport Dialogue took place in January 2019. Negotiations on a comprehensive
EU-Turkey Air Agreement continued during the year. Regarding the Customs Union, the
Commission adopted a recommendation for opening of negotiations with Turkey on the
modernisation of the Customs Union on 21 December 2016. This recommendation has been
forwarded to the Council where it has been under consideration, without prejudice to Member
States' position. In June 2018, the General Affairs Council concluded that, under the
prevailing circumstances, no further work towards the modernisation of the EU-Turkey
Customs Union could be foreseen. The Customs Union Joint Committee met in May 2018 to
discuss a significant number of issues hampering the smooth functioning of the Customs
Union.
In the area of visa, migration and asylum, the implementation of the March 2016
EU-Turkey Statement has continued to deliver concrete results in reducing irregular and
dangerous crossings and in saving lives in the Aegean Sea. Turkey sustained its considerable
efforts to provide massive and unprecedented humanitarian aid and support to more than 3.6
million registered refugees from Syria and some 370 000 registered refugees from other
countries. A progress report on the implementation of the European Agenda on Migration

                                             105
 was issued in March 2019. In the context of the EU-Turkey visa liberalisation dialogue,
Turkey has established seven working groups to carry out technical work on the outstanding
benchmarks. The Directorate-General for Civil Registry and Citizenship started issuing
second-generation biometric passports for Turkish citizens in April 2018. In November, the
EU and Turkey launched negotiations on an international agreement on the exchange of
personal data between Europol and the Turkish authorities competent for fighting serious
crime and terrorism.
Turkey and the EU further built on the fruitful cooperation under the Facility for Refugees in
Turkey. The Facility manages a total of EUR 6 billion: EUR 3 billion for 2016-2017 has been
fully contracted and more than EUR 2 billion disbursed, with the balance to be disbursed in
the course of implementation of Facility projects through to mid-2021. The European Council
gave its agreement on the financing of the second tranche of the Facility in 2018, with
resources coming from the EU budget (EUR 2 billion) and Member States (EUR 1 billion).
Programming for the second tranche was launched immediately afterwards; already EUR 450
million were contracted in 2018. The funding will continues to support projects focused on
humanitarian assistance, education, migration management, health, municipal infrastructure,
and socio-economic support.
Regarding bilateral financial assistance, the Commission adopted the revised Indicative
Strategy Paper of Turkey in August 2018, strengthening the focus of EU financial assistance
on the fundamental pillars of the enlargement strategy. Furthermore, as a consequence of low
absorption capacity, lack of performance and backsliding on reforms, this revision involved a
substantial cut of the budget of the Instrument for Pre Accession Assistance, that was reduced
by EUR 759 million for the 2018-2020 period. The total allocation for the year 2018
amounted to EUR 387 million. This was composed of the annual programme with a EUR
110.8 million EU contribution designed to support activities on fundamental rights, co-
finance Turkey's participation in Union programmes and agencies in order to continue to
enhance people-to-people contacts between Turkey and the EU and provide support to civil
society (EUR 12.4 million). An EU allocation of EUR 145 million was made to the multi-
annual action programmes on Environment and climate action, Education, employment and
social policies, Competitiveness and innovation and Transport. Finally, EUR 131 million
were allocated to the agricultural and rural development programme.
Turkey participates in the following EU programmes: Erasmus+, Horizon 2020, Customs
2020, Fiscalis 2020, COSME (Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and Medium-sized
Enterprises) and EASI (Employment and Social Innovation). Turkey participates in the
European Environmental Agency, in the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug
Addiction and since 2015 in the Civil Protection Mechanism and has agreed to participate in
the European Solidarity Corps.




                                             106
 ANNEX II – STATISTICAL ANNEX
STATISTICAL DATA (as of 29.04.2019)
Turkey


Basic data                                                             Note    2006        2013        2014        2015        2016        2017
Population (thousand)                                                         68 860.5   75 627.4    76 667.9    77 695.9    78 741.1    79 814.9
Total area of the country (km²)                                               785 347    785 347     785 347     783 562     780 270     780 270


National accounts                                                      Note    2006        2013        2014        2015        2016        2017
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million national currency)                      789 228    1 809 713   2 044 466   2 338 648   2 608 526   3 106 537
Gross domestic product (GDP) (million euro)                                   436 278    714 313     703 412     772 979     780 225     753 904
GDP (euro per capita)                                                          6 300      9 400       9 100       9 900       9 800       9 400
GDP per capita (in purchasing power standards (PPS))                          11 200      16 300      17 700      19 300      19 200      19 900
GDP per capita (in PPS), relative to the EU average (EU-28 = 100)               45          61          64          66          65          66
Real GDP growth rate: change on previous year of GDP volume (%)                 7.1         8.5         5.2         6.1         3.2         7.4
Employment growth (national accounts data), relative to the previous             :           :           :           :           :           :
year (%)
Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (in volume) per person                 :           :           :           :           :           :
employed, relative to the previous year (%)
Unit labour cost growth, relative to the previous year (%)                       :           :           :           :           :           :
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the nominal unit labour cost growth index             :           :           :           :           :           :
(2010 = 100)




                                                                       107
 Labour productivity per person employed: GDP (in PPS) per person                      :         :           :           :         :       :
employed relative to EU average (EU-28 = 100)
Gross value added by main sectors
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%)                                              9.3       7.7         7.5         7.8       7.0     6.9
Industry (%)                                                                         22.6     22.4        22.7        22.4      22.3    23.2
Construction (%)                                                                     7.2       9.2         9.2         9.3       9.7     9.7
Services (%)                                                                         60.9     60.7        60.6        60.5      61.0    60.2
Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP (%)                                  :         :           :           :         :       :
Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP (%)                                 28.7     28.5        28.9        29.7      29.3    30.0
Changes in inventories, as a share of GDP (%)                                        0.9       1.2         0.1        -1.4        :       :
Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                                   21.7     22.3        23.8        23.3      22.0    24.8
Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP (%)                                   26.5     28.1        27.6        26.0      24.9    29.3
Gross fixed capital formation by the general government sector, as a                  :         :           :           :         :       :
percentage of GDP (%)


Business                                                                      Note   2006     2013        2014        2015      2016    2017
Industrial production volume index (2010 = 100)                                      92.7    116.5       120.5       124.1      126.3   134.3
Number of active enterprises (number)                                                 :     2 695 131   2 677 316   2 689 910     :       :
Birth rate: number of enterprise births in the reference period (t) divided           :       12.4        12.2        12.1      12.3      :
by the number of enterprises active in t (%)
Death rate: number of enterprise deaths in the reference period (t)                   :       12.4        10.8          :         :       :
divided by the number of enterprises active in t (%)
People employed in SMEs as a share of all persons employed (within the                :       74.2        73.5        72.7        :       :
non-financial business economy) (%)



                                                                              108
 Value added by SMEs (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR                   :       97 399    95 399    104 876       :         :
million)
Total value added (in the non-financial business economy) (EUR                     :       184 511   178 415   207 088       :         :
million)


Inflation rate and house prices                                          Note    2006       2013      2014      2015       2016      2017
Harmonised consumer price index (HICP), change relative to the                    9.3        7.5       8.9       7.7        7.7      11.1
previous year (%)
**Annual change in the deflated house price index (2010 = 100)                     :          :         :         :          :         :


Balance of payments                                                      Note    2006       2013      2014      2015       2016      2017
Balance of payments: current account total (million euro)                       -24 823    -47 920   -32 852   -28 940    -29 937   -41 918
Balance of payments current account: trade balance (million euro)               -32 569    -60 174   -47 868   -43 378    -36 943   -52 186
Balance of payments current account: net services (million euro)                11 068     17 783    20 079    21 837     13 789    17 649
Balance of payments current account: net balance for primary income              -4 767    -6 490    -6 202     -8 699    -8 294    -9 783
(million euro)
Balance of payments current account: net balance for secondary income            1 445      962       1 139     1 300     1 511     2 402
(million euro)
Net balance for primary and secondary income: of which government                1 871      880       840        979      1 493     2 224
transfers (million euro)
**3 year backward moving average of the current account balance                    :        -7.1      -5.6       -5.0      -4.1      -4.4
relative to GDP (%)
**Five year change in share of world exports of goods and services (%)             :          :         :       11.94     10.41      1.56
Net balance (inward - outward) of foreign direct investment (FDI)               15 340.1   7 474.6   4 568.3   11 632.3   9 211.3   7 277.2
(million euro)
Foreign direct investment (FDI) abroad (million euro)                            735.9     2 662.5   5 020.7   4 336.2    2 480.8   2 328.9

                                                                         109
 of which FDI of the reporting economy in the EU-28 countries (million                   :       1 372.2    1 372.6   2 404.2    1 374.1    1 037.4
euro)
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy (million euro)              16 076.0   10 137.0   9 589.0   15 968.5   11 692.1   9 606.1
of which FDI of the EU-28 countries in the reporting economy (million                   :       4 371.3    4 495.3   8 380.2    4 371.7    2 841.5
euro)
**Net international investment position, relative to GDP (%)                          -37.4      -41.8      -47.6     -44.6      -42.8      -54.3
Year on year rate of change in gross inflow of remittances (in national                39.5       -4.6       9.5       6.2       -10.8      -13.3
currency) from migrant workers (%)


Public finance                                                                Note    2006       2013       2014      2015       2016       2017
***General government deficit / surplus, relative to GDP (%)                            :         0.2        0.2       0.6        -1.1      -2.8
***General government gross debt relative to GDP (%)                                    :         31.4      28.8       27.6       28.3      28.3
Total government revenues, as a percentage of GDP (%)                                   :         33.0      32.3       32.6       33.0      31.4
Total government expenditure, as a percentage of GDP (%)                                :         32.8      32.1       31.9       34.1      34.2


Financial indicators                                                          Note    2006       2013       2014      2015       2016       2017
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP (%)                          38.0       41.4      43.4       46.7       47.4      53.4
Gross external debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports (%)               173.6      187.5      183.9     201.6      218.2      216.9
Money supply: M1 (banknotes, coins, overnight deposits, million euro)                38 616     78 110     91 571    97 885     103 717    99 085
Money supply: M2 (M1 plus deposits with maturity up to two years,                    160 193    309 213    360 158   373 608    381 256    357 979
million euro)
Money supply: M3 (M2 plus marketable instruments, million euro)                      171 832    323 062    375 844   387 048    393 581    370 812
Total credit by monetary financial institutions to residents (consolidated)   1)     100 358    341 791    423 556   448 738    447 892    440 779
(million euro)
**Annual change in financial sector liabilities (%)                                     :         22.2      17.3       14.5       17.5      19.8

                                                                              110
 **Private credit flow, consolidated, relative to GDP (%)                   2)        :       17.4      11.1      14.2      13.6      13.9
**Private debt, consolidated, relative to GDP (%)                                    :       71.7      74.6      79.4      84.8      85.1
Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum (%)                               15.77     5.62      9.15      10.7      9.32      11.58
Lending interest rate (one year), per annum (%)                                    21.47     13.35     14.77     16.85     15.79     18.12
Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum (%)                            3)      16.99     9.21      9.25      10.72     10.33     13.53
Euro exchange rates: average of period (1 euro = … national currency)              1.809     2.534     2.906     3.026     3.343     4.121
Trade-weighted effective exchange rate index, 42 countries (2010 = 100)            87.1      90.4      85.9      85.0      83.8      74.9
**3 year change (T/T-3) in the trade-weighted effective exchange rate                :       -9.6      -2.3      -7.2      -7.3      -12.9
index, 42 countries (2010 = 100)
Value of reserve assets (including gold) (million euro)                           50 323    98 663    95 828    99 624    95 863    95 362


External trade in goods                                                    Note    2006      2013      2014      2015      2016      2017
Value of imports: all goods, all partners (million euro)                          111 096   189 784   182 338   186 536   179 468   207 000
Value of exports: all goods, all partners (million euro)                          68 020    114 563   118 654   129 555   128 792   139 229
Trade balance: all goods, all partners (million euro)                             -43 076   -75 222   -63 684   -56 981   -50 676   -67 771
Terms of trade (export price index / import price index * 100) (number)    4)      102        98       100       107       111       105
Share of exports to EU-28 countries in value of total exports (%)                  56.3      41.5      43.5      44.5      47.9      47.0
Share of imports from EU-28 countries in value of total imports (%)                42.6      36.7      36.7      38.0      39.0      36.4


Demography                                                                 Note    2006      2013      2014      2015      2016      2017
Crude rate of natural change of population (natural growth rate): number           12.4      12.0      12.3      11.8      11.2      10.8
of births minus deaths (per thousand inhabitants)
Infant mortality rate deaths of children under one year of age (per                24.5      10.8      11.1      10.7      10.0       9.2
thousand live births)


                                                                           111
 Life expectancy at birth: male (years)                                          :     75.4   75.4    75.4   75.4   75.7
Life expectancy at birth: female (years)                                        :     81.1   80.9    81.0   81.0   81.3


Labour market                                                           Note   2006   2013   2014    2015   2016   2017
Economic activity rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the               52.6   58.4   58.9    59.9   60.9   61.9
population aged 20–64 that is economically active (%)
*Employment rate for persons aged 20–64: proportion of the population          48.2   53.4   53.2    53.9   54.3   55.3
aged 20–64 that are in employment (%)
Male employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%)                                73.2   75.3   75.0    75.3   75.5   76.1
Female employment rate for persons aged 20–64 (%)                              24.0   31.8   31.6    32.6   33.2   34.4
Employment rate for persons aged 55–64: proportion of the population           27.6   31.5   31.4    31.9   33.4   34.4
aged 55–64 that are in employment (%)
Employment by main sectors
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries (%)                                 5)      :     23.6   21.1b   20.6   19.5   19.4
Industry (%)                                                                    :     19.4   20.5b   20.0   19.5   19.1
Construction (%)                                                                :     7.0    7.4b    7.2    7.3    7.4
Services (%)                                                                    :     50.0   51.0b   52.2   53.7   54.1
People employed in the public sector as a share of total employment,           15.1   13.5   13.1b   13.5   13.8   13.3
persons aged 20–64 (%)
People employed in the private sector as a share of total employment,          84.9   86.5   86.9b   86.5   86.2   86.7
persons aged 20–64 (%)
Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is unemployed    6)     8.8    8.8     9.9    10.3   10.9   10.9
(%)
Male unemployment rate (%)                                              6)     8.6    8.0     9.1    9.3    9.6    9.4
Female unemployment rate (%)                                            6)     9.1    10.6   11.9    12.6   13.6   13.9


                                                                        112
 Youth unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force aged 15–24         6)      16.5     16.9    17.8    18.4    19.5    20.5
that is unemployed (%)
Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that has       6)      3.0      2.1      2.0     2.2     2.2     2.4
been unemployed for 12 months or more (%)
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed at most        6)      7.2      7.3     8.4b     8.9     9.1     8.9
lower secondary education (ISCED levels 0-2) (%)
Unemployment rate for persons (aged 25–64) having completed tertiary       6)      5.9      6.9      8.1     8.4     9.3     9.4
education (ISCED levels 5-8) (%)


Social cohesion                                                            Note   2006     2013     2014    2015    2016    2017
Average nominal monthly wages and salaries (national currency)                     756     1 509    1 648   1 828   2 031   2 287
Index of real wages and salaries (index of nominal wages and salaries               :        :        :       :       :       :
divided by the inflation index) (2010 = 100)
GINI coefficient                                                                   45       42       41      42      43      43
Poverty gap                                                                        36.5     27.9    28.4    27.8    26.6    26.4
*Early leavers from education and training: proportion of the population           48.8    37.6p    38.3    36.7    34.3    32.5
aged 18–24 with at most lower secondary education who are not in
further education or training (%)


Standard of living                                                         Note   2006     2013     2014    2015    2016    2017
Number of passenger cars relative to population size (number per                   89.2    122.8    128.6   136.3   143.7   150.8
thousand population)
Number of mobile phone subscriptions relative to population size                  763.4e   909.0b   925.3   935.2   940.4   962.7
(number per thousand population)
Mobile broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants)                                  0       32       42      50      65      71
Fixed broadband penetration (per 100 inhabitants)                                   4       11       12      12      13      15


                                                                           113
 Infrastructure                                                               Note   2006     2013     2014     2015     2016     2017
Density of railway network (lines in operation per thousand km²)             7)      11.3     12.6     13.1     13.2     13.2     13.3
Length of motorways (kilometres)                                                    1 908    2 244    2 278    2 282    2 542    2 657


Innovation and research                                                      Note   2006     2013     2014     2015     2016     2017
Public expenditure on education relative to GDP (%)                                   :       4.4      4.4      4.4      4.7      4.2
*Gross domestic expenditure on R&D relative to GDP (%)                               0.56     0.82     0.86     0.88     0.94     0.96
Government budget appropriations or outlays on R&D (GBAORD), as a                     :       0.37     0.32     0.32     0.29     0.34
percentage of GDP (%)
Percentage of households who have internet access at home (%)                         :       49.1     60.2     69.5     76.3     80.7


Environment                                                                  Note   2006     2013     2014     2015     2016     2017
*Index of greenhouse gas emissions, CO2 equivalent (1990 = 100)                     169.3    208.3    214.4     223     235.4      :
Energy intensity of the economy (kg of oil equivalent per 1 000 euro                176.9    155.2    158.3    161.6    165.2    165.7
GDP at 2010 constant prices)
Electricity generated from renewable sources relative to gross electricity           25.5     28.1     20.5     31.5     32.3     29.4
consumption (%)
Road share of inland freight transport (based on tonne-km) (%)                       94.8     95.2     95.1     95.9     95.6     95.4


Energy                                                                       Note   2006     2013     2014     2015     2016     2017
Primary production of all energy products (thousand TOE)                            26 198   29 100   28 803   31 463   35 707   36 471
Primary production of crude oil (thousand TOE)                                      2 142    2 379    2 606    2 661    2 722    2 700


                                                                             114
 Primary production of solid fuels (thousand TOE)                                 12 948    13 542    13 814    12 798    15 498    15 682
Primary production of gas (thousand TOE)                                          745       443       395       314       302       292
Net imports of all energy products (thousand TOE)                                69 013    86 533    94 014    103 702   106 056   116 709
Gross inland energy consumption (thousand TOE)                                   93 847    113 909   122 213   132 326   139 620   150 404
Gross electricity generation (GWh)                                               176 299   240 154   251 963   261 783   274 408   297 278


Agriculture                                                               Note    2006      2013      2014      2015      2016      2017
Agricultural production volume index of goods and services (at producer             :         :         :         :         :         :
prices) (2010 = 100)
Utilised agricultural area (thousand hectares)                                   40 493    38 423    38 558    38 551    38 328p   38 002p
Livestock numbers: live bovine animals (thousand heads, end of period)    8)     10 871    14 415    14 223    13 994    14 080    15 944
Livestock numbers: live swine (thousand heads, end of period)                      1         3         3         2         1         1
Livestock numbers: live sheep and live goats (thousand heads, end of             32 260    38 510    41 485    41 924    41 329    44 302
period)
Raw milk available on farms (thousand tonnes)                                    11 952    18 224    18 631    18 655    18 489    20 700
Harvested crop production: cereals (including rice) (thousand tonnes)            34 643    37 489    32 714    38 637    35 281    36 133
Harvested crop production: sugar beet (thousand tonnes)                          14 452    16 489    16 743    16 023    19 593    21 149
Harvested crop production: vegetables (thousand tonnes)                          25 852    28 448    28 487    29 552    30 267    30 826




    : = not available
    b = break in series
    e = estimate
    p = provisional
    * = Europe 2020 indicator
    ** = Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) indicator

                                                                          115
   *** = The government deficit and debt data of enlargement countries are published on an "as
  is" basis and without any assurance as regards their quality and adherence to ESA rules.

    Footnotes

1) Data cover loans granted by MFIs to residents. Participation Banks and Investment and
   Development Banks are included.
2) Data cover debt securities and loans.
3) Average of monthly data. Overnight deposit facility.
4) Underlying indices are calculated with Fisher index formula.
5) 2013: includes NACE Rev. 2 Group 98.1 (undifferentiated goods-producing activities of
   private households for own use).
6) Unemployment based on four weeks criterion and using only active jobs search methods.
7) Main lines only.
8) Excluding buffaloes.




                                                                        116

