     EN




EN        EN
      COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES




                               Brussels, 8.11.2006
                               SEC(2006) 1390




     COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

             Turkey 2006 Progress Report



                {COM(2006) 649 final}




EN                                                   EN
                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS

     1.       Introduction .................................................................................................................. 4
     1.1.     Preface.......................................................................................................................... 4
     1.2.     Relations between the EU and Turkey......................................................................... 4
     2.       Enhanced political dialogue and political criteria........................................................ 5
     2.1.     Democracy and the rule of law .................................................................................... 5
     2.2.     Human rights and the protection of minorities .......................................................... 10
     2.3.     Regional issues and international obligations ............................................................ 24
     3.       Economic criteria ....................................................................................................... 25
     3.1.     Introduction ................................................................................................................ 25
     3.2.     Assessment in terms of the Copenhagen criteria ....................................................... 26
     3.2.1.   The existence of a functioning market economy ....................................................... 26
     3.2.2.   The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union
              .................................................................................................................................... 29
     4.       Ability to assume the obligations of membership...................................................... 31
     4.1.     Chapter 1: Free movement of goods .......................................................................... 31
     4.2.     Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers .......................................................... 33
     4.3.     Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services ......................... 34
     4.4.     Chapter 4: Free movement of capital ......................................................................... 35
     4.5.     Chapter 5: Public procurement................................................................................... 36
     4.6.     Chapter 6: Company law............................................................................................ 37
     4.7.     Chapter 7: Intellectual property law........................................................................... 38
     4.8.     Chapter 8: Competition Policy................................................................................... 39
     4.9.     Chapter 9: Financial Services..................................................................................... 40
     4.10.    Chapter 10: Information society and media ............................................................... 41
     4.11.    Chapter 11: Agriculture.............................................................................................. 43
     4.12.    Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy .................................. 44
     4.13.    Chapter 13: Fisheries.................................................................................................. 47
     4.14.    Chapter 14: Transport policy ..................................................................................... 47
     4.15.    Chapter 15: Energy .................................................................................................... 49




EN                                                                       2                                                                              EN
      4.16.      Chapter 16: Taxation.................................................................................................. 50
     4.17.      Chapter 17: Economic and Monetary Union ............................................................. 51
     4.18.      Chapter 18: Statistics.................................................................................................. 51
     4.19.      Chapter 19: Employment and Social Policy .............................................................. 52
     4.20.      Chapter 20: Enterprise and Industrial Policy ............................................................. 54
     4.21.      Chapter 21: Trans European Networks ...................................................................... 55
     4.22.      Chapter 22: Regional Policy and Coordination of Structural Instruments ................ 56
     4.23.      Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights ........................................................... 57
     4.24.      Chapter 24: Justice, Freedom and Security................................................................ 62
     4.25.      Chapter 25: Science & Research................................................................................ 65
     4.26.      Chapter 26: Education & Culture............................................................................... 66
     4.27.      Chapter 27: Environment ........................................................................................... 66
     4.28.      Chapter 28: Consumer and Health Protection............................................................ 68
     4.29.      Chapter 29: Customs Union ....................................................................................... 69
     4.30.      Chapter 30: External Relations .................................................................................. 70
     4.31.      Chapter 31: Foreign, Security and Defence Policy.................................................... 71
     4.32.      Chapter 33: Financial and Budgetary Provisions....................................................... 76

     STATISTICAL ANNEX.......................................................................................................... 77




EN                                                                    3                                                                       EN
                          COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

                                      Turkey 2006 Progress Report



     1.      INTRODUCTION

     1.1.    Preface

     Following the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council in December 1997, the
     Commission has reported regularly to the Council and the Parliament.

     This report on progress made by Turkey in preparing for EU membership largely follows the
     same structure as in the previous years. The report:

     – briefly describes the relations between Turkey and the Union;

     – analyses the situation in Turkey in terms of the political criteria for membership;

     – analyses the situation in Turkey on the basis of the economic criteria for membership;

     – reviews Turkey's capacity to assume the obligations of membership, that is, the acquis
       expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation, and the policies of the Union.

     The period covered by this report is 1 October 2005 to 30 September 2006. Progress is
     measured on the basis of decisions taken, legislation adopted and measures implemented. As a
     rule, legislation or measures which are under preparation or await Parliamentary approval
     have not been taken into account. This approach ensures equal treatment across all reports and
     permits an objective assessment.

     The report is based on information gathered and analysed by the Commission. In addition,
     many sources have been used, including contributions from the government of Turkey, the
     Member States, European Parliament reports1 and information from various international non-
     governmental organisations.

     The Commission draws conclusions regarding Turkey in its separate communication on
     enlargement2, based on the technical analysis contained in this report.

     1.2.    Relations between the EU and Turkey

     Accession negotiations were opened with Turkey in October 2005. The first phase of the
     accession process, the analytical examination of the acquis (screening) was completed in
     October 2006. Negotiations on one chapter, science and research, were opened and
     provisionally closed in June.




     1
            The rapporteur for Turkey was Mr C. Eurlings.
     2
            Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2006 – 2007.



EN                                                     4                                              EN
      The enhanced political dialogue has continued under the United Kingdom, Austrian and
     Finnish presidencies.

     The Association Agreement has continued to work in a satisfactory manner.

     EC-Turkey trade has continued to expand in the context of the customs union, reaching
     € 75 billion in 2005. In all occasions, the EU urged Turkey to remove all restrictions on the
     free movement of goods, including restrictions on means of transport regarding to Cyprus.
     Other unfulfilled commitments by the Turkish side persist, relating to technical barriers to
     trade, import licences, state aids, enforcement of intellectual property rights, and other
     discriminatory provisions. The partial reduction of mandatory standards is however a positive
     step. The EU hopes that negotiations to extend the customs union to the area of public
     procurement and services can resume soon. Trade negotiations were completed in September
     on processed agricultural products. These aimed to improve market access and to adjust
     customs union provisions to the EU's 2004 enlargement. No progress can be reported
     concerning Turkey's long-standing ban on imports of live bovine animals, beef and other
     animal products.

     The revised Accession Partnership was adopted in January 2006, setting out priorities that
     Turkey should address in the short- and medium-term in its preparations for accession.

     The 2006 EC pre-accession financial assistance amounts to € 500 million. EIB lending in
     Turkey stands at some € 4.2 billion.


     2.       ENHANCED POLITICAL DIALOGUE AND POLITICAL CRITERIA

     This section examines progress made by Turkey towards meeting the Copenhagen political
     criteria which require stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human
     rights and respect for and protection of minorities. It also monitors the respect for
     international obligations, regional cooperation, and good neighbourly relations.

     2.1.     Democracy and the rule of law

     Parliament

     The Turkish Grand National Assembly, in which six parties are represented, has adopted 148
     laws of a total 429 draft bills submitted since October 2005. The next elections are scheduled
     for November 2007.

     Throughout the year, the EU Harmonisation Committee and the Human Rights Committee
     played an important role in addressing issues arising under the Copenhagen political criteria
     (on the Human Rights Committee see section on human rights).

     A public debate has developed over the need to change the electoral system, which currently
     requires political parties to reach a 10% threshold at national level to achieve representation.

     The government submitted a new reform package in June, covering a number of areas related
     to the Copenhagen political criteria. Parliament passed several laws in the area of the political
     criteria.




EN                                                  5                                                    EN
      However, some legislative proposals included in the government's reform package were not
     adopted before the end of the reporting period.

     Amendments to the anti-terror law were adopted in June 2006 as a response to the escalation
     of terrorism. Under the new law, the list of what constitutes a terrorist offence was extended
     and a wide definition of terrorism maintained. The law introduces legal restrictions on
     freedom of expression, the press and the media3. In August, President Sezer applied to the
     Constitutional Court for the cancellation of Articles 5 and 6, providing for such restrictions.
     The new anti-terror law reduces procedural safeguards for suspects of terrorist offences.
     Access to a lawyer may be denied for a period of 24 hours, and under certain circumstances
     security officers may attend meetings between suspects and their lawyer. As regards the
     defence rights, officials and former officials are granted differentiated treatment. Furthermore
     they dispose of wider discretion with regard to the use of firearms.

     Government

     The government, in power since November 2002, has repeatedly confirmed its commitment to
     the EU accession process. As a result, it presented a new reform package in June (see
     Parliament).

     In October 2005 the EU Chief Negotiator presented the structure of the negotiating team. The
     Head of the team is the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The EU Chief Negotiator is in charge of
     steering and implementing the accession work. A Monitoring and Steering Committee was
     established. The Committee comprises the Secretary General for EU Affairs, the Deputy
     Undersecretary of the Foreign Ministry, the Deputy Undersecretary of the State Planning
     Organisation, the Deputy Undersecretary of the Office of the Prime Minister and Turkey’s
     Permanent representative to the EU.

     The Secretariat General for EU Affairs (EUSG) has played a co-ordinating role, in particular
     regarding alignment under the political criteria, financial co-operation and, since 3 October
     2005, the process of screening and negotiating acquis chapters.

     However, given the significant increase of EUSG responsibilities, there is a need for a
     proportional strengthening of its staff and resources. Limited action has been taken in this
     respect.

     Public administration

     Parliament adopted a Law Establishing an Ombudsman. The Ombudsman will handle
     petitions from natural and legal persons in relation to administrative acts. This is a priority of
     the Accession Partnership and an important step forward, as it creates an institutional
     framework for the monitoring of public administration by the Turkish citizens.

     The Constitution was amended in November 2005 in line with the Public Financial
     Management and Control (PFMC)’s broader definition of state budget. This includes general


     3
            The new law establishes aggravated penalties for "propaganda" and "praise" of terrorism. However, the
            definition of such crimes is not in line with the Council of Europe Convention for the Prevention of
            Terrorism (CETS 196). Freedom of the press and media could be undermined by provisions allowing
            the suspension of periodicals and introducing the liability of chief editors and of press and media
            owners for publishing terrorist propaganda or praise in press or media organs.



EN                                                       6                                                          EN
      budget agencies, special budgets agencies, budgets of regulatory agencies as well as budgets
     of social security agencies.

     Turkey has made some progress regarding better regulation. The government adopted a
     Regulation in February 2006 which introduces regulatory impact assessments (RIA) into the
     Turkish legal system. The use of RIA should, amongst other things, support Turkey in the
     conduct of EU accession negotiations.

     However, a number of issues require attention. PFMC needs to be fully implemented and the
     institutional capacity for conducting regulatory impact assessment needs to be reinforced.

     No progress has been made in adopting the Framework Law on Public Administration, which
     was vetoed by the President in 2004. As a result, the devolution of central government powers
     to local administrations was hampered. Moreover, fiscal decentralisation has not been
     achieved. No progress has been made to establish City Councils.

     The Law on the Associations of Local Governments was amended in January 2006. This
     allows villages, municipalities and special provincial administration to undertake joint
     projects. The expenditure and budgets of the joint projects became exempt from the Court of
     Accounts audit. This is not in line with the principles of external audit.

     No progress can be reported on the draft Civil Servant law. This aims to partially repeal the
     existing legal provisions and to adopt a more managerial legal instrument.

     Overall, there has been some legislative progress in public administration reform. The
     implementation of reforms adopted in previous years has continued. Further efforts are
     needed in the area of decentralisations.

     Civil-Military relations

     There has been progress concerning the competence of military courts to try civilians. Under
     the law amending the relevant provisions of the Military Criminal Code as adopted in June
     2006, no civilian will be tried in military courts in peacetime unless military personnel and
     civilians commit an offence together. The new law also introduces the right of retrial in
     military courts. Accordingly, if there is an ECtHR decision in favour of military or civilian
     persons who have been tried before military courts, they can ask for a retrial.

     The National Security Council (NSC) has continued to meet on a bi-monthly basis in line with
     its revised role. It has discussed domestic and foreign policy issues such as counter-terrorism,
     internal security, energy security, migration, water policy and foreign aid policy. The NSC
     has submitted reports to the government, including recommendations.

     One such document, the revised National Security Policy Document (NSPD), adopted by the
     government in November 2005, is a classified document and was not discussed by Parliament.

     The Armed Forces have continued to exercise significant political influence. Senior members
     of the armed forces have expressed their opinion on domestic and foreign policy issues
     including Cyprus, secularism, the Kurdish issue, and on the indictment concerning the
     Semdinli bombing (see sections on the judiciary and South East).

     The Turkish Armed Forces Internal Service Law remains unchanged. This defines the role
     and duties of the Turkish military and contains articles granting the military a wide margin of


EN                                                  7                                                   EN
      manoeuvre. Similarly, as reported last year, Article 2a of the NSC Law provides a broad
     definition of national security. No measures have been taken to enhance civilian control over
     the Gendarmerie. This is part of the army and operates under the General Staff as well as
     under the Ministry of Interior in terms of law-enforcement duties.

     In March, a draft report of the Şemdinli Investigation Commission of Parliament revealed the
     existence of a secret protocol on Security, Public order and Assistance Units (commonly
     called EMASYA). Signed by the General Staff and the Ministry of Interior in 1997, this
     protocol allows for military operations to be carried out for internal security matters under
     certain conditions without request from the civilian authorities. Under the protocol, the
     military can gather intelligence against internal threats.

     Reforms in defence expenditures, adopted in previous years have started to be implemented.
     The budgetary appropriations of the National Intelligence Service, the National Security
     Council as well as the administrative budget of the under-secretariat in charge of the Defence
     Industry were all included in the 2006 state budget. However, most procurement projects are
     funded separately from extra-budgetary funds.

     No further progress has been achieved in terms of strengthening parliamentary overseeing of
     the military budget and expenditures. The Parliamentary Planning and Budget Committee
     reviews the military budget only in a general manner but does not examine programmes and
     projects. Furthermore, extra-budgetary funds are excluded from parliamentary scrutiny.

     No internal audit of military property has yet taken place pending the adoption of secondary
     legislation to the Law on Public Financial and Management Control (PFMC). According to
     Article 160 of the Constitution, the Court of Auditors can carry out ex-post audit of defence
     expenditures. However, the Court remains unable to carry out its tasks due to the lack of the
     relevant implementing legislation.

     Overall, limited progress has been made in aligning civil-military relations with EU practices.
     Statements by the military should only concern military, defence and security matters and
     should only be made under the authority of the government, while the civilian authorities
     should fully exercise their supervisory functions in particular as regards the formulation of the
     national security strategy and its implementation, including with regard to relations with
     neighbouring countries.

     Judicial system

     The authorities have been focusing on the implementation of the new Penal Code, the Code of
     Criminal Procedure and the Law on Enforcement of Sentences following the entry into force
     of these laws in 2005.

     In this respect, the Ministry of Justice updated all existing circulars by issuing some 100 new
     circulars mainly addressed to public prosecutors in January 2006. This action aimed to create
     a clearer and more concise framework for the implementation of the new Code of Criminal
     Procedure and the Law on Enforcement of Sentences. One circular of particular importance
     concerns the implementation of legislation on arrest, detention and statement taking and the
     prevention of human rights violations during these practices. This circular underlines the duty
     of prosecutors to monitor the situation of detainees through regular visits to places of
     detention. It also requires prosecutors to report periodically to the Ministry of Justice on
     implementation by law enforcement authorities.



EN                                                  8                                                    EN
      Two circulars were issued by the Ministries of Interior and Justice in November 2005 and
     January 2006, respectively, to clarify the interaction between prosecutors and the judicial
     police.

     Courts have continued to apply the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

     During the year 620 new judges were recruited. Training activities continued to ensure
     implementation of the reforms carried out in the last three years. The budget of the Ministry
     of Justice was increased and the programme of building Courts of First Instance continued.
     The establishment of Regional Courts of Appeal is proceeding.

     However, a number of issues remain to be addressed. Certain provisions of the Penal Code, in
     particular Article 301, have been used to restrict the expression of non-violent opinions (see
     section on freedom of expression).

     A number of cases have shown inconsistency in the judiciary approach to the interpretation of
     legislation.

     As regards the implementation of the new Code of Criminal Procedure, the establishment of
     the judicial police has led to some tensions between the law enforcement bodies and
     prosecutors. Despite the Ministries of Interior and Justice issuing two circulars, prosecutors
     report difficulties in effective supervision of the judicial police.

     With regard to the independence of the judiciary, various provisions of the Turkish
     Constitution and of domestic law guarantee this principle. However, a number of factors are
     perceived as undermining it. Judges and public prosecutors are attached to the Ministry of
     Justice as far as their administrative functions are concerned. The High Council of Judges and
     Prosecutors, the supreme governing body of the judiciary, does not have its own secretariat,
     separate premises and budget. The judicial inspectors, who are responsible for evaluating the
     performance of judges and prosecutors, are attached to the Ministry rather than to the High
     Council. The Minister and the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Justice are two of the seven
     members of the Council with voting rights. The remaining five are appointed among judges of
     the Court of Cassation and the Council of State. This composition does not seem to be
     representative of the judiciary as a whole and, together with the other issues listed above, may
     create the potential for the executive to influence decisions relating to the careers of judges in
     Turkey, provided that the executive is present4.

     Questions were raised on the independence of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors in
     the aftermath of the publication in March 2006 of the indictment on the Şemdlinli bombing
     (see Southeast section), which included accusations against the Land Forces Commander and
     other high-ranking military commanders. The General Staff criticised the indictment in a
     press statement and urged those bearing constitutional responsibility to take action. In April
     the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors reviewed charges against the prosecutor and
     applied the highest disciplinary sanction, i.e. dismissal from office. The final review by the
     High Council on this matter is scheduled for November.




     4
            Despite being the Chairman of the HCJP, the Minister of Justice rarely attends the High Council's
            meetings. The number of meetings presided by the Minister of Justice in the last six years are as
            follows: 9 in 2001, 11 in 2002, 12 in 2003, 8 in 2004, 4 in 2005 and 2 (as of 26.9.2006) in 2006.



EN                                                     9                                                        EN
      Overall, there was continued progress in the area of judicial reform. However, implementation
     of the new legislation by the judiciary presents a mixed picture so far and the independence of
     the judiciary still needs to be further established.

     More details on the judicial system can be found under Chapter 23 – Judiciary and
     fundamental rights.

     Anti-corruption measures

     Concerning transparency in the public administration, the Law on Access to Information was
     amended in 2006 to enable citizens to dispute all decisions of state agencies regarding denials
     of requests for information.

     The Parliamentary investigation commissions on the gasoline smuggling and on the illegal
     public offering completed their reports. Both reports show a wide range of corruption
     activities. The first case involved a former Minister of Finance and Minister of State, and has
     serious economic and financial implications. The reports include recommendations for
     measures to be taken by the public institutions.

     However, a number of issues remain to be addressed. Corruption remains widespread in the
     Turkish public sector and judiciary, despite the efforts of recent years. Turkey needs to
     improve its legislation on financing and auditing of political parties.

     The wide scope of parliamentary immunity remains a significant problem in the context of
     corruption in Turkey.

     With regard to corruption investigations carried out by the Inspection Boards, the need for a
     prior authorisation from the hierarchy when investigating some categories of public officials
     hampers the investigation.

     There is a need for better co-ordination of the system currently in place for combating
     corruption. The designation of a body with sufficient independence responsible for the
     conception and monitoring the implementation of anti-corruption measures could be helpful
     in this respect.

     Overall, there has been some limited progress in the fight against corruption, notably on
     increasing transparency in the public administration. However, corruption remains widespread
     and anti-corruption authorities and policies are still weak.

     2.2.    Human rights and the protection of minorities

     Observance of international human rights law

     Concerning the ratification of human rights instruments, the Second Optional Protocol to the
     International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) on the abolishment of the death
     penalty was ratified in March 2006. Protocol No 13 of the ECHR, on the abolishment of the
     death penalty at all times was ratified in February 2006. Protocol No 14 of the ECHR,
     amending the control system of the Convention entered into force in May 2006. The UN
     Convention against corruption entered into force in June 2006.

     Turkey ratified the revised European Social Charter on 27 September 2006. The European
     Social Charter was accepted with reservations on Article 5 (right to organise) and Article 6


EN                                                 10                                                  EN
      (right to bargain collectively) as well as on paragraph 3 of Article 2 (minimum annual
     holidays) and paragraph 1 of Article 4 (remuneration and decent standard of living). Turkey
     has lifted previous reservations on the European Social Charter's provisions, namely the right
     of children and young persons to protection and the right of disabled persons.

     Four Additional Protocols to the ECHR remain to be ratified, including Protocol No 12 on the
     general prohibition of discrimination by public authorities, signed in 2001. The First Optional
     Protocol to the ICCPR, signed in 2004, and the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention
     against Torture (OPCAT), signed in September 2005, also awaits ratification. Ratification of
     these protocols is a priority in the Accession Partnership.

     During the first 8 months of the year 2006, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
     delivered 196 final judgements finding that Turkey had violated at least one article of the
     ECHR. In 5 cases the ECtHR ruled that there was no violation of the ECHR. Most of these
     judgements refer to cases lodged prior to 1999.
     From 1st September 2005 until 31 August 2006 2 100 new applications regarding Turkey were
     made to the ECtHR. More than 2/3 of the applications introduced to the ECtHR refer to the
     right to a fair trial (Article 6) and protection of property rights (Article 1 of Protocol No 1).
     The right to life (Article 2) and the prohibition of torture (Article 3) are referred to in 78 and
     142 cases respectively.

     In relation to the situation in the Southeast, the ECtHR found in the İçyer v. Turkey5 case that
     the Law on Compensation and Losses Resulting from Terrorist Acts provides adequate
     redress to the extent that it is undisputed that the applicant could today return freely to his
     village (see section on Southeast). Approximately 1 500 cases relating to the possibility to
     return to villages have been declared inadmissible by the Court following this decision.

     The reforms undertaken by Turkey in 2004 and 2005 have had positive consequences on the
     execution of judgments of the ECtHR. However, Turkish cases still represent 14.4% of the
     cases pending before the Committee of Ministers for execution control.

     Restrictions in Turkish legislation prevent the re-opening of domestic proceedings following a
     violation found by the ECtHR under certain circumstances6. This prevents the execution of
     the ECtHR judgement in the Hulki Güneş case7, as well as in 113 cases related to fairness of
     proceedings before the former state security courts.

     As regards the Öcalan case, the Court left the question of the reopening largely to the
     evaluation of domestic authorities under the Committee of Ministers' supervision. In July an
     Istanbul Court rejected the request for a retrial of Abdullah Öcalan. The Committee of
     Ministers will evaluate the reasons given by the Istanbul Court for rejecting the appeal at one
     of its upcoming meetings.

     Other pending cases before the Committee of Ministers awaiting the adoption of necessary
     execution measures relate to the control of actions of security forces and effective remedies


     5
            Case of Icyer v. Turkey (Application no 18888/02).
     6
            The Code of Criminal Procedure only provides for the reopening of proceedings in respect of ECtHR
            judgements which became final before 4 February 2003 or judgements rendered in applications lodged
            with the Court after 4 February 2003.
     7
            Case of Hulki Günes v. Turkey (Application no 28490/95).



EN                                                     11                                                        EN
      against abuses (93 pending cases). These cases refer mainly to violations that took place
     against the background of the fight against terrorism in the first half of the 1990s, but some
     concern events in the course of normal police activity. A number of positive legal reforms
     have been adopted since the judgements were issued. The Committee is now closely
     monitoring their implementation.

     Furthermore, 115 cases related to freedom of expression are pending before the Committee of
     Ministers for execution control. These cases mainly relate to articles of the old Turkish Penal
     Code which were amended in 2004. Some relate to the provisions of the Anti-terror law.
     Execution of these judgments will however be assessed by the Committee of Ministers in the
     light of case law of Turkish courts, as well as the practice of prosecutions (see section on
     freedom of expression).

     Concerning the case of Cyprus, the Committee of Ministers has decided to examine measures
     taken with regard to education and freedom of religion with a view to closing these questions
     at its meeting of December 2006. The Committee on Missing Persons was reactivated in
     2004. However, the Committee of Ministers considers that additional measures should be
     taken for the fate of missing persons to be determined8.

     Finally, with regards to property rights9, the ECtHR ruled in the case of Xenides-Arestis v.
     Turkey that a remedy which secures effective redress for violations must be introduced, in
     relation to the applicant, as well as in respect of all similar applications pending before the
     Court. The ECtHR has not yet ruled on the question whether adequate redress was introduced
     in the meantime.

     With regard to the promotion and enforcement of human rights, the Human Rights Presidency
     and the 931 District Human Right Boards continued to provide training on human rights and
     process applications on alleged human right violations. Between January and June 2006, 778
     applications were received. The vast majority of applications related to health and patients'
     rights, non-discrimination, right to property, and social security rights.

     However, the Human Rights Presidency lacks independence from the government, is
     understaffed and has a limited budget. Furthermore, a new president has not been appointed
     since the resignation of the previous one in September 2005. The Human Rights Advisory
     Board under the Office of the Prime Minister has not been operating since the publication of a
     report on minority rights in Turkey in October 2004. This is a body composed of NGOs,
     experts and representatives from ministries.

     The Parliamentary Human Rights Committee continued to play an active role in collecting
     complaints on human rights violations and conducting fact-finding visits to the regions. The
     Committee received 864 applications between October 2005 and June 2006. It has conducted
     several investigations and finalised three reports since January 2006. The Committee has no
     legislative role, and is thus not consulted on legislation affecting human rights.




     8
            Interim Resolution ResDH(2005)44 concerning the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights
            of 10 May 2001 in the case of Cyprus against Turkey.
     9
            Case of Cyprus v. Turkey, (Application no 25781/94), Case of Loizidou v. Turkey (Application no
            15318/89), Case of Xenides-Arestis v. Turkey (Application no 46347/99).



EN                                                    12                                                      EN
      Overall, Turkey has made progress on the ratification of international human rights
     instruments and in the execution of ECtHR judgements. However, there is a need to further
     upgrade the human rights institutional framework.

     Civil and Political Rights

     With regard to torture and ill-treatment, a comprehensive legislative framework is in place.
     The downward trend has continued in the number of cases of torture and ill-treatment.

     The reforms in detention procedures and detention periods have shown positive results on the
     ground. The regulation concerning the system for the medical examination of persons in
     police or gendarmerie custody complies with previous recommendations from the Committee
     on the Prevention of Torture.

     However, implementing the legislative reforms undertaken in previous years remains a
     challenge. Cases of torture and ill-treatment are still being reported, in particular outside
     detention centres.

     With respect to some provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedures and of the Law on
     execution of sentences, the notification of a relative of the detained person and the right to
     access a lawyer are not uniformly applied. Furthermore, while the Code introduced provisions
     against the use of statements obtained under torture, concerns remain on statements obtained
     prior to the enactment of the Code (see also access to justice).

     Concerns remain with regard to the confidentiality and quality of medical examinations.
     There is a need to further strengthen the independence of the Institute of Forensic Medicine
     Institute and to make further efforts to implement the Istanbul Protocol10 throughout the
     country. The Human Rights Boards have yet to assume a more prominent role in the on-site
     monitoring of law enforcement establishments. Since October 2005, the Boards carried out
     992 visits to police stations and detention centres.

     The human rights situation in the Southeast raises particular concerns following the violent
     disturbances that took place in several cities in March and April (see section on the
     Southeast). Over 550 people were detained as a result of these events, including over 200
     children. The Diyarbakir Bar Association submitted more than 70 complaints of ill-treatment
     to the authorities. Subsequently, investigations were launched into 39 of these claims.

     During the events in Diyarbakir, forensic examinations of detainees were carried out in places
     of detention. This contravenes the rules and the circulars issued by the Ministries of Justice
     and Health as well as the independence of the medical profession.

     The new provisions introduced in June 2006 to amend the anti-terror law could undermine the
     fight against torture and ill-treatment (see section on parliament).

     Despite an increase in the number of convictions since 2003, the fight against impunity
     remains an area of concern.



     10
            Istanbul Protocol: Manual on the effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other
            Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment, submitted to the United National Human
            Rights Commissioner for Human Rights, 9 August 1999.



EN                                                    13                                                      EN
      Overall, the Turkish legal framework includes a comprehensive set of safeguards against
     torture and ill-treatment. Cases of torture and ill-treatment declined over the reporting period.
     However, concerns remain regarding cases outside detention centres, human rights violations
     in the Southeast and the problem of impunity.

     With regard to access to justice and right of defence, detainees enjoy the right to legal
     counsel, and statements made in the absence of lawyers are not admissible as evidence in
     court under the new Code of Criminal Procedure. However, concerns remain with regard to
     the lack of review of past statements (see section on torture and ill-treatment).

     A considerable increase in the appointment of legal aid lawyers has been registered since the
     new Code of Criminal Procedure entered into force. With regard to the prison system,
     Turkey has adopted regulations to implement the 2004 legislative reforms in this area.
     Physical infrastructure has also continued to be improved and training is being strengthened.

     Outstanding problems in prison facilities include a lack of communal activities, limited
     interaction between custodial staff and prisoners, inadequate health-care and psychiatric
     resources as well as cases of overcrowded prison cells.

     Cases of ill-treatment by prison staff have been reported. Civil and military prisons are not
     open to independent monitoring, pending the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the UN
     Convention against Torture (OPCAT).

     The application of a solitary confinement regime to prisoners sentenced to aggravated life
     imprisonment is too extensive. Such a regime needs to be applied for as short a time as
     possible and be based on an individual risk assessment of the prisoner concerned.

     With regard to freedom of expression (including the media), the Ministry of Justice issued a
     circular in January 2006, regarding cases of freedom of expression in written and visual
     media. It instructed prosecutors to take into consideration both Turkish legislation and the
     ECHR. The circular also established a monthly monitoring mechanism of criminal
     investigations and court cases against the press and media.

     Some progress can be reported in the area of broadcasts in languages other than Turkish at
     local and regional level (see section on cultural rights and Chapter 10).

     However, the prosecutions and convictions for the expression of non-violent opinion under
     certain provisions of the new Penal Code are a cause for serious concern and may contribute
     to create a climate of self-censorship in the country. This is particularly the case for Article
     301 which penalises insulting Turkishness, the Republic as well as the organs and institutions
     of the state. Although this article includes a provision that expression of thought intended to
     criticise should not constitute a crime, it has repeatedly been used to prosecute non violent
     opinions expressed by journalists, writers, publishers, academics and human rights activists.

     In July, the General Assemblies of the Civil and Penal Chambers of the Court of Cassation
     established restrictive jurisprudence on Article 301. The Court confirmed a six-month
     suspended prison sentence for journalist Hrant Dink. This was on the basis of Article 301 of
     the new Penal Code for insulting "Turkishness" in a series of articles he wrote on Armenian
     identity.




EN                                                  14                                                   EN
      Against this background, Article 301 needs to be brought into line with the relevant European
     standards. The same applies to other provisions of the Penal code which have been used to
     prosecute the non-violent expression of opinions and may limit freedom of expression. The
     potential impact of the anti-terror law on freedom of expression raises concerns (see section
     on parliament).

     Recent decisions taken by the government in relation to the appointment procedure of the
     members of the High Audiovisual Board (RTÜK) are a cause for concern to the extent that
     they weaken the independence of the media regulatory body.

     Overall, open debate has increased in recent years in Turkish society on a wide range of
     issues. Notwithstanding this trend, freedom of expression in line with European standards is
     not yet guaranteed by the present legal framework.

     As regards freedom of assembly, public demonstrations are subject to fewer restrictions than
     in the past. However, in some cases security forces used excessive force, especially when the
     demonstrations were carried out without permission.

     The administrative investigations have been finalised into the incidents during a
     demonstration promoting women's rights in March 2005. Three members of the Istanbul
     Directorate of Security have been punished with a reprimand due to “Failure in undertaking
     the duty of training and supervising members under their command.” A further six staff
     members have been punished with a salary deduction due to “disproportionate use of force
     when dispersing the demonstrators and speaking to or treating the public in a degrading
     manner”. The investigation launched by the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office of Istanbul
     against seven police officers is currently ongoing.

     Concerning freedom of association, the legal framework is generally in line with
     international standards. The impact on the ground of the legislative reforms concerning
     associations has been positive, in particular the adoption of a Law on Associations in
     November 2004.

     However, the requirement to notify the authorities in case of receipt of finances from abroad
     results in difficulties and cumbersome procedures for NGOs. Furthermore, unlike
     associations, foundations still need permission before applying for projects outside Turkey
     and funded by international organisations.

     Some difficulties related to the registration of associations remain. The requests of the
     Diyarbakir Protestant church and of the Jehovah's Witnesses to establish associations were
     challenged in court. In both cases the court ruled in favour of the associations. In April 2006,
     a Kurdish association was ordered to close by a Court in Diyarbakır on the grounds that its
     statute included the objectives of setting up a Kurdish archive, museum and library and that
     its activities would be carried out also in the Kurdish language. Gay and lesbian associations
     have encountered fewer difficulties than in the past. However, they are also occasionally
     subject to court proceedings.

     As regards political parties, court cases against several parties, including DEHAP and
     HAKPAR, are still ongoing. There has been no progress regarding aligning the Turkish Law
     on Political Parties with EU practice. Parties are not allowed to use languages other than
     Turkish. The Law on Political Parties needs to be amended to ensure that political parties are



EN                                                 15                                                   EN
      permitted to operate in line with the standards established by the ECHR and the case law of
     the ECtHR.

     As concerns civil society organisations, the recent reform environment has led to positive
     developments. Civil society organisations have become relatively more vocal and better
     organised, especially since the adoption of the new Law on Associations. There is an
     increasing variety of organisations in Turkey including approximately 80 000 registered
     associations, and several hundred unions and chambers (including vocational and professional
     associations).

     As concerns freedom of religion, freedom of worship continues to be generally respected.

     In April a delegation consisting of the Ministries of Interior, Education, Foreign Affairs, the
     EUSG and Istanbul governorate visited leaders of non-Muslim communities in Istanbul to
     discuss their problems and possible solutions.

     Although the mandatory indication of religious affiliation in some personal documents, such
     as ID-cards, was abolished in April 2006, such documents still include information on
     religion, leaving open the potential for discriminatory practices. This is an area of concern.

     Furthermore, a number of other problems remain. Non-Muslim religious communities have
     no access to legal personality and continued to face restricted property rights. They
     encountered problems in the management of their foundations and in recovering property by
     judicial means. The June 2005 ruling by the Council of State narrowing the scope for the
     Directorate General for Foundations to take over the management of foundations was not
     applied during the reporting period. In this respect, no progress can be reported on the
     Büyükada Greek Girls’ and Boys’ Orphanage, whose management remains under the control
     of the DG foundations.

     The impact of the new law on foundations on the issues above will have to be assessed once it
     has been adopted.

     Furthermore, restrictions on the training of clergy and on foreign clergy to work in Turkey
     remain. Turkish legislation does not provide for private higher religious education for these
     communities. The Greek Orthodox Halki (Heybeliada) seminary remains closed. The public
     use of the ecclesiastical title of Ecumenical Patriarch is still banned.

     Sermons and publications of the Religious Affairs Directorate (Diyanet) and of local religious
     authorities occasionally appear hostile towards proselytising activities. Attacks against clergy
     and places of worship of non-Muslim religious Communities have been reported. The court
     case concerning the murder of the Catholic Priest Andrea Santoro in a church in the Black Sea
     region province of Trabzon in February 2006 resulted in a heavy penalty for the perpetrator.
     Several incidents against Syriacs also occurred.

     There have been no developments in relation to the situation of the Alevi community. Alevis
     face difficulties for opening their places of worship (Cem houses). Cem houses are not
     recognised as places of worship and receive no funding from the authorities.

     Alevi children are subject to compulsory religious instruction in schools, which fails to
     acknowledge their specificity. A case on compulsory religious education is pending before the




EN                                                 16                                                   EN
      ECtHR. References to Alevis are planned to be introduced in the secondary school curricula
     as from next year.

     Overall, freedom of worship continues to be generally respected. However, no progress can
     be reported with regard to difficulties encountered by non-Muslim religious communities on
     the ground. Furthermore, the Alevis continue to face discriminatory practices.




EN                                              17                                                EN
      Economic and Social Rights

     As concerns women's rights, the report of the ad hoc Parliamentary Committee on "crimes in
     the name of honour, violence against women and children" has been finalised. The report puts
     forward practical recommendations, which received wide media coverage. A circular by the
     Prime Minister's Office in July follows up on these, by giving priority to the fight against
     violence, listing the activities to be undertaken and naming the state bodies responsible. The
     Directorate General for the Status of Women is given the task of overall co-ordination of
     activities.

     The campaign “Stop domestic violence” entered its second phase, after being launched in
     October 2004 by the daily Hürriyet, in cooperation with the Foundation of Contemporary
     Education and the Istanbul Governor’s Office. Most daily newspapers and TV channels
     extended their support to a campaign targeting the education of girls.

     The legal framework is overall satisfactory, but implementation remains a challenge. The Law
     on the Protection of the Family is only partially applied. Despite the provisions in the new
     Penal Code that lists moral killings as an aggravated circumstance for murder crimes, the
     sentences issued by courts reflect a mixed picture. While in some cases courts imposed
     maximum sentences (life imprisonment), in others they opted for lighter sentences, especially
     if a minor had committed the murder.

     Crimes in the name of honour and suicides committed by women due to the influence of the
     family continue to occur, especially in the regions of the East and Southeast. Nonetheless,
     there is still a lack of reliable data on such events as well as on domestic violence more
     generally. According to the preliminary results of the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence
     against Women, causes of suicides are early and forced marriages, domestic violence and
     denial of reproductive rights. Poverty, urbanisation, displacement and internal migration, and
     thus changing socioeconomic situation of women are the contexts within which suicides
     occur. Women’s suicides are not always properly investigated, especially in the Southeast,

     In parts of the South East it still occurs that girls are not registered at birth. This hampers the
     fight against forced marriage and crimes in the name of honour since these girls and women
     cannot be properly traced.

     There is still a need to further increase the provision of shelters for women subjected to
     domestic violence11. The provision in the Law on Municipalities, adopted by Parliament in
     July 2004 is not yet fully implemented. All municipalities with a population greater than
     50 000 should provide a shelter.

     Women remain vulnerable to discriminatory practices, due largely to a lack of education and a
     high illiteracy rate. The girls’ education campaign conducted by the Ministry of National
     Education and UNICEF ensured the enrolment in primary schools of 62 000 girls in 2005,
     which would otherwise have been out of school. In 2006 the campaign was extended to all 81
     provinces. Private sector campaigns to increase school enrolment and to improve the physical
     condition of schools have continued.


     11
            According to official sources there are 17 shelters for women established under the Social Services and
            Child Protection Institution (SHÇEK) growing to 30 if those established by other institutions are
            included. However, these figures are considered tentative.



EN                                                       18                                                           EN
      The level of participation of women in the parliament and in local representative bodies
     remains very low and prevailing discrimination exists in the labour market. Participation by
     women in the workforce is among the lowest in OECD countries (see Chapter 19 employment
     and social policy).

     As regards institutional capacity, the Directorate General for the Status of Women still suffers
     from a lack of staff. The Advisory Board on the Status of Women has not been convened
     during the reporting period.

     Overall, there has been growing public attention on the issue of women's rights in Turkey.
     However, full respect of women's rights remains a critical problem, particularly in the poorest
     areas of the country. While the legal framework is overall satisfactory, its implementation
     remains inadequate.

     With respect to children’s rights, the right to education for children, particularly girls,
     remains a problem in some areas. The newly initiated 'conditional cash transfer' programme
     implemented by the Social Support and Solidarity Fund provides incentives and compensation
     to targeted families by offering cash transfers on the condition that they send their children to
     school if they are of school age. Enrolment campaigns need to be sustained and consolidated
     to address the low level of school attendance, in particular in rural areas of the South East.

     The incidence of street children, child poverty and child labour remains significant. The
     Turkish Labour Law prohibits the employment of children under the age of 15. However,
     there are shortcomings regarding the application of the law.

     The Law on the Protection of Children, adopted in July 2005 establishes a legal framework
     aimed at safeguarding the rights and well-being of both children with particular problems and
     children under legal investigation or who have been convicted of crimes. Further
     implementation of the Law is needed, in line with the relevant ILO conventions.

     In late 2005, ill-treatment of children in an orphanage of the Social Services and Child
     Protection Institution (SHÇEK) in Malatya revealed the shortcomings of the child protection
     system in Turkey.

     As regards the rights of disabled people, several implementing legislation were issued
     following the entry into force of the Law on People with Disabilities in 2005. These cover
     areas such as workplaces and educational services for disabled people. More needs to be done
     to establish decentralised structures and services for disabled people and also to facilitate
     access to education of children with disabilities.

     As regards mental health, there are significant discrepancies in the quality of services, which
     is particularly poor in some rural areas. The largest psychiatric hospital in Turkey abolished
     the use of unmodified electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). However, Turkey has yet to ban this
     practice throughout the country and establish written guidelines regarding the administration
     of modified ECT as part of an individualised treatment plan. Ongoing work, in co-operation
     with the World Bank, to establish a strategy in this area needs to be intensified, with a view in
     particular to establish a mental health law. Rehabilitation centres generally lack adequate
     infrastructure, resources and qualified personnel. Mentally disabled living with family
     members receive little assistance from the state.

     There is no progress to be reported on trade union's rights.



EN                                                  19                                                   EN
      The government submitted to social partners two legislative proposals aimed at amending the
     two currently applicable laws in this area. However, no further progress was made and no
     formal legislative initiative has been taken by the government.

     As a result, the current significant shortcomings on the right to organise and the right to
     collective bargaining, including the right to strike remain in place. The thresholds at company
     and sector levels required for signing a collective agreement, and the cumbersome procedures
     to enrol in trade unions are still in force. Journalists continue to encounter specific problems
     in organising and collective bargaining.

     Turkey still falls short of ILO standards, particularly in relation to conventions No 87
     (freedom of associations and protection of the right to organise) and No 98 (right to organise
     and collective bargaining). Turkey ratified the revised European Social Charter in September
     2006 but maintains reservations on Article 5 (right to organise) and Article 6 (right to bargain
     collectively) (see Chapter 19 – Social policy and employment).

     In April 2006, the Ministry of Labour and Social Security sued the Gıda-İş Trade Union on
     the grounds that some of the elected representatives of the union do not have 10 years
     seniority, as required by the Law on Trade Unions. The labour court decided to close down
     the union but the Court of Cassation overturned this ruling on procedural grounds.

     Minority Rights, Cultural Rights and Protection of Minorities

     Turkey’s approach to minority rights remains unchanged. According to the Turkish
     authorities, under the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne, minorities in Turkey consist exclusively of
     non-Muslim religious communities. The minorities associated in practice by the authorities
     with the Treaty of Lausanne are Jews, Armenians and Greeks. However, there are other
     communities in Turkey which, in the light of the relevant international and European
     standards, could qualify as minorities.

     The February 2005 visit of the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities (HCNM) to
     Ankara has not been followed up and no progress has been made in starting a dialogue on the
     situation of national minorities in Turkey. The deepening of such a dialogue between Turkey
     and the HCNM is necessary. It needs to include relevant areas such as minority education,
     minority languages, the participation of minorities in public life and broadcasting in minority
     languages. This would facilitate Turkey's further alignment with international standards and
     best practice in EU Member States to ensure cultural diversity and to promote respect for and
     protection of minorities.

     Turkey’s reservation towards the UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
     regarding the rights of minorities – to which a number of EU Member States objected as
     being incompatible with the object and purpose of this Covenant – and its reservation to the
     UN Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), regarding the right to
     education12, are of concern.



     12
            Extract of reservation to ICCPR: “The Republic of Turkey reserves the right to interpret and apply the
            provisions of Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in accordance with
            the related provisions and rules of the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey and the Treaty of
            Lausanne of 24 July 1923 and its Appendixes.” Extract of reservation to ICESCR: “The Republic of
            Turkey reserves the right to interpret and apply the provisions of the paragraph (3) and (4) of the Article



EN                                                         20                                                             EN
      Turkey has not signed the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of
     National Minorities or the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.

     There has been limited progress as concerns education. The 2005 recommendations of the
     European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) on school curricula and
     textbooks as well as on the functioning of minority schools remain valid. Further efforts are
     needed to remove discriminatory language from textbooks. The management of the minority
     schools including the dual presidency remains an issue.

     There has been no progress in relation to Syriacs who continue to face difficulties in relation
     to property. Those who have lost their Turkish nationality are not able to register their
     property in the land registry. In this context, complaints about seizures of property have
     increased.

     The Greek minority continues to encounter problems. These are particularly related to
     education and property rights. The Greek minority properties on the island of Gökçeada
     (Imvros) and Bozcaada (Tenedos) are under threat of confiscation and tender by the Turkish
     authorities.

     As regards cultural rights, permission was granted to two local TV channels in Diyarbakır
     and to one radio in Şanlıurfa to broadcast in Kurdish. However, time restrictions apply, with
     the exception of films and music programmes. All broadcasts, except songs, must be subtitled
     or translated in Turkish, which makes live broadcasts technically cumbersome. Educational
     programmes teaching the Kurdish language are not allowed. (see Chapter 10).

     The Turkish Public Television (TRT) has continued broadcasting in five languages including
     Kurdish. However, the duration and scope of TRT's national broadcasts in five languages is
     very limited. No private broadcaster at national level has applied for broadcasting in
     languages other than Turkish since the enactment of the 2004 legislation.

     Children whose mother tongue is not Turkish cannot learn their mother tongue in the Turkish
     public schooling system. Such education can only be made by private education institutions.
     As concerns Kurdish all such courses were closed down in 2004. Therefore, there are no
     possibilities to learn Kurdish today in the public or private schooling system. Furthermore,
     there are no measures taken to facilitate access to public services for those who do not speak
     Turkish.

     As reported above, according to the Law on Political Parties, the use of languages other than
     Turkish is illegal in political life. The court case against the Rights and Freedoms Party
     (HAK-PAR) regarding a speech in Kurdish continues.

     As regards the situation in the East and Southeast, progress has been made with regard to
     the compensation of losses resulting from terrorist acts. The ECtHR ruled that the
     compensation law allowed for the provision of adequate redress for persons who were denied
     access to their possessions in their place of residence.




            13 of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in accordance to the provisions under the
            Article 3, 14 and 42 of the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey.”



EN                                                      21                                                         EN
      The process of compensation is ongoing. The Damage Assessment Commissions established
     to process the compensation claims have so far received around 215 981 applications.
     Approximately 33 299 have been processed as of September 2006.

     The situation in the South-East has deteriorated since the resumption of violence by the PKK,
     which is on the EU list of terrorist organisations. During the period between November 2005
     and June 2006, there were 774 terrorist attacks reported, which led to 44 military, 5 police and
     13 civilian casualties.

     In the aftermath of the funerals of some PKK terrorists at the end of March, riots took place in
     Diyarbakir and spread to other cities in the region. Demonstrators attacked the police, civilian
     residents and shops. Ten civilians were killed during clashes with the police and security
     forces, including three children. Many civilians suffered bullet wounds. There are widespread
     reports of excessive and arbitrary use of force by the security forces, even against
     ambulances. Investigations are ongoing to determine the causes of these deaths.

     The violence triggered by the March riots had a negative impact on the human rights
     situation. Over 700 people were detained and cases of ill treatment were reported.

     A number of security measures have been reinstated as a response to the escalation of
     terrorism, such as road blocks and checkpoints in some provinces of the Southeast. On the
     legislative side, amendments to the anti-terror law were adopted in June 2006 (see section on
     parliament).

     The November 2005 Şemdinli bombing, which killed one person and injured others, also had
     a negative impact on the situation in the region. A court in Van imposed heavy prison
     sanctions on two gendarmerie officers and a former PKK member reported to work as a
     gendarmerie informer who were found responsible for the bombing. A Parliamentary
     Committee was established in November 2005 to investigate the Şemdinli events. The
     Committee has not published its report.

     The overall socio-economic situation in the Southeast remains difficult and there is no
     comprehensive plan to address this issue. The positive statement of Prime Minister Erdogan
     in 2005 stressing the need to resolve through democratic means what he called "the Kurdish
     issue" was not followed up. There is almost no dialogue between the authorities and locally
     elected politicians. Furthermore, many locally elected politicians face court cases. Moreover,
     the 10% threshold under the electoral law makes it difficult for all but the nationwide largest
     parties to be represented in Parliament.

     In spite of the ECtHR ruling in the Icyer vs.Turkey case of January 2006, the implementation
     of the Law on Compensation of Losses Resulting from Terrorist Acts raises several concerns.
     Overall, there seems to be divergences in the methods used by the compensation
     commissions. They have large discretionary powers and procedures are often cumbersome.
     As a result, the payment of the amounts due is slow. There are concerns about the level of
     compensation.

     Furthermore, the conditions attached to the eligibility for compensation could leave a large
     number of potential beneficiaries outside the scope of the Law. There is also a heavy burden
     of proof on applicants to provide documentation, including property titles, which in many
     cases have never existed.




EN                                                 22                                                   EN
      The issue of “reconciliation” is not addressed in the compensation approach in relation to past
     human rights violations committed against internally displaced persons – such as the burning
     and destruction of property, killings, disappearances and torture.

     The situation of internally displaced persons (IDPs) remains an issue of concern. There has
     been no further progress on the establishment of a new governmental body responsible for
     implementing the “Return to Village and Rehabilitation Programme and to developing policy
     on IDP return. A study on IDPs carried out by the Haceteppe University should provide a
     thorough analysis and policy guidance, however its publication has been delayed.

     Several factors affect negatively the return of IDPs: the absence of basic infrastructure, the
     lack of capital, limited employment opportunities and the security situation. In particular,
     large numbers of landmines13 constitute a strong disincentive to return. Moreover, the
     discretion of the governor plays a crucial role in the implementation of the legal and
     administrative provisions regulating return.

     No progress has been made in addressing the problem of village guards14. No action was
     taken to phase them out.

     A return to normality in the Southeast can only be achieved by opening a dialogue with local
     counterparts. A comprehensive strategy should be pursued, to achieve the socio-economic
     development of the region and the establishment of conditions for the Kurdish population to
     enjoy full rights and freedoms. Issues that need to be addressed include the return of internally
     displaced persons, compensation for losses incurred by victims of terrorism, landmines as
     well as the issue of village guards.

     As concerns the Roma, amendments to the Law on Settlement adopted in September 2006
     repealed discriminatory provisions against the Roma.

     However, discriminatory provisions remain in the Law on Movements and residence of
     aliens.

     Recent research by the Bilgi University suggests the Roma population in Turkey is around
     two million. Roma experience discriminatory treatment in access to adequate housing,
     education, health and employment. There are frequent forced evictions. Urban regeneration
     projects of historical districts have led to displacing Roma population residing in those
     districts (i.e. Ankara-Çinçin, Zonguldak-Ere, Istanbul-Sulukule).

     During the reporting period more Roma-led advocacy organisations and two Roma
     Federations were established. Several NGO projects were carried out aimed at capacity
     building of Roma organisations and establishing a clearer picture of the problems they
     encounter.

     Overall, Turkey made little progress on ensuring cultural diversity and promoting respect for
     and protection of minorities in accordance with international standards.




     13
            Although many landmines have already been removed, international NGOs estimate the total number to
            be 900 000 units.
     14
            According to official figures there are 57 601 village guards still on duty in 2006.



EN                                                     23                                                        EN
      2.3.     Regional issues and international obligations

     Cyprus

     Under the negotiating framework and the Accession Partnership, Turkey is expected to ensure
     continued support for efforts to find a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem within
     the UN framework and in line with the principles on which the Union is founded, whilst
     contributing to a better climate for a comprehensive settlement; implement fully the Protocol
     adapting the Ankara Agreement to the accession of the 10 new EU Member States including
     Cyprus; and take concrete steps for the normalisation of bilateral relations with all Member
     States, including the Republic of Cyprus, as soon as possible.

     Moreover, under its declaration of 21 September 2005, the EU expects full, non-
     discriminatory implementation of the Additional Protocol, and the removal of all obstacles to
     the free movement of goods, including restrictions on means of transport. The EU will
     monitor this closely and evaluate full implementation in 2006. The declaration also stressed
     that recognition of all Member States is a necessary component of the accession process and
     underlined the importance it attaches to the normalisation of relations between Turkey and all
     EU Member States, as soon as possible.

     Turkey has stated on several occasions that it remains committed to support UN efforts to find
     a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem. Turkey expressed support for the setting
     up of technical committees between the two Cypriot communities, as agreed during talks
     hosted by the UN in July, initiated after the February meeting in Paris between UN Secretary
     General Mr Annan and President Papadopoulos.

     Turkey has not fully implemented the Additional Protocol extending the EC-Turkey
     Association Agreement to the ten Member States that acceded on 1 May 2004, which it had
     signed in July 2005 and which enabled the accession negotiations to start. Turkey has
     continued to deny access to its ports to vessels flying the Republic of Cyprus flag or where the
     last port of call is in Cyprus. Such restrictions on shipping often preclude the most economical
     way of transport and therefore result in a barrier to free movement of goods and to trade. They
     infringe the Customs Union agreement. Similar restrictions continued to apply in the field of
     air transport.

     Turkey's Prime Minister, as well as the Foreign Minister, stated on several occasions that the
     Additional Protocol would not be implemented as long as the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot
     community continued. An "Action Plan on Cyprus" presented in January by Turkey's Foreign
     Minister followed the same approach. EU representatives have frequently reminded the
     Turkish government that implementing the Protocol is a legal obligation as such, which must
     not be linked to the situation of the Turkish Cypriot community.

     No progress has been made on any aspects of normalising bilateral relations with the Republic
     of Cyprus. Turkey has continued to impose a veto on Cyprus’ membership of certain
     international organizations such as the OECD as well as its participation in the Wassenaar
     Agreement on the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports and on Dual Use Goods.

     In December, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in the case of Myra Xenides-Arestis
     vs Turkey that Turkey had violated the "protection of property" (Article 8) and the "right to
     respect for the applicant's home" (Article 1 of Protocol No 1). The Court demanded that
     Turkey introduces a remedy which secures effective redress for violations, in relation to the



EN                                                 24                                                   EN
      application, as well as in respect of all similar applications pending before the Court in
     accordance with the Convention and within the established deadlines. The ECtHR has not yet
     ruled on the question whether adequate redress was introduced in the meantime.

     Peaceful settlement of border disputes

     Turkey and Greece have continued to pursue the positive development of their bilateral
     relations. High-level contacts have continued, with the respective Prime Ministers meeting
     informally twice during the last year.

     The 34th round of exploratory talks between foreign ministries initiated in 2002 was held in
     Athens in May. A new package of confidence building measures was agreed during the visit
     of the Greek Foreign Minister to Istanbul in June. The package includes the building of a new
     bridge over the border river Evros/Meriç and the establishment of a joint civilian task force on
     natural disaster prevention. A direct hotline between the Combined Air Operation Centers in
     the Turkish city of Eskişehir and the corresponding authorities in the Greek city of Larissa
     will soon become operational. In addition, it was agreed to establish a second hotline between
     the respective Chiefs of General Staff. The summer moratorium for suspending military
     exercises in the Aegean was extended for one month. In July, the Greek Chief of Staff visited
     his counterpart in Turkey.

     Following the collision of Turkish and Greek military aircraft over the Aegean in May, which
     caused the death of a Greek pilot, the two Foreign ministers agreed that the incident would be
     investigated.

     The Negotiating Framework includes the following requirement against which progress will
     be measured: "Turkey's unequivocal commitment to good neighbourly relations and its
     undertaking to resolve any outstanding border disputes in conformity with the principle of
     peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the United Nations Charter, including if
     necessary jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice". Furthermore, the Accession
     Partnership for Turkey has included as a short term priority to "unequivocally commit to good
     neighbourly relations; address any sources of friction with its neighbours; and refrain from
     any action which could negatively affect the process of peaceful settlement of border
     disputes". It should be noted in this context that the “casus belli” reference in relation to the
     possible extension of Greek territorial waters in the resolution adopted by the Turkish Grand
     National Assembly in 1995 remains unchanged.

     See Chapter 31 – Foreign, Security and Defence policies for relations with other
     neighbouring countries.


     3.       ECONOMIC CRITERIA

     3.1.     Introduction

     In examining the economic developments in Turkey, the Commission's approach was guided
     by the conclusions of the European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993, which stated that
     membership of the Union requires the existence of a functioning market economy, and the
     capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union.




EN                                                  25                                                   EN
      3.2.     Assessment in terms of the Copenhagen criteria

     3.2.1.   The existence of a functioning market economy

     Economic policy essentials

     The authorities managed to bolster economic policy efforts though recent agreements with
     international financial institutions, in particular by the Stand-By Arrangement with the
     International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Programmatic Public Sector Development Policy
     Loan with the World Bank. The Pre-Accession Economic Programme (PEP) submitted to the
     Commission in December 2005 reflects good progress in institutional capacity building and
     important commitments to further reform. The government steered a steady reform course,
     although political considerations occasionally slowed down this course. The methodology and
     co-ordination for budgeting and medium-term economic policy making is hampered by the
     fragmentation of responsibilities between government bodies. Decisions are sometimes taken
     on an ad hoc basis. Impact assessments are either lacking or based on partial information. In
     sum, the government largely maintained consensus on macroeconomic stabilisation and
     structural reforms.

     Macroeconomic stability

     Real annual GDP growth slowed down slightly from a high 7.4% in 2005 to 7.0% in the first
     half year of 2006. Private consumption and investment bolstered GDP from the expenditure
     side. In the first half of 2006, gross fixed capital formation growth slowed down to 19% from
     24% in 2005. The external sector contributed negatively to GDP, as export growth slowed to
     3.9% from 7.4% in the previous year. The rapidly growing Turkish economy ran into fast
     growing external imbalances. This was predominantly caused by too slow structural reforms
     and a sizeable increase in investment spending. The authorities reacted promptly by fiscal and
     monetary tightening. Recent high-frequency indicators suggest that the change in fiscal and
     monetary policy proved out effective. Besides, the restrictive effect on growth may be
     alleviated by strengthening external demand. Average per capita income amounted to just
     over 25% of the EU-25 average in 2005. In conclusion, economic growth has remained quite
     strong and has become more balanced.

     The current account deficit increased sharply to 6.3% of GDP in 2005. The deficit has risen
     further in the first half of 2006 to 7% of GDP, driven by strong domestic demand growth,
     higher oil prices and lower tourism earnings. Turkey can still easily finance its current
     account deficit. It has recently considerably increased its foreign currency reserves as a result
     of very high privatisation revenues, including from foreign investors. The current account
     deficit was also driven by higher investment, which should enhance the export capacity of the
     economy over the medium term, and help reducing the external vulnerability.

     In spite of the high growth, few new jobs have been created. The unemployment rate ranges
     between 8% and 10%. The skill mismatch between labour demand and supply and some
     labour market rigidities continue to hamper job creation. Unemployment was much higher
     among the young (around 18%) and was of a long-term nature for more than half of job-
     seekers. The lower unemployment rate in the agricultural sector, which include unpaid family
     workers, suggests large pockets of underemployment in the economy. In addition, the
     employment rate fell slightly to 43% by mid-2006. In particular, female employment remains
     low at 23%. Overall, unemployment remains fairly high and constant, while participation in
     the labour market is low and falling.



EN                                                  26                                                   EN
      Disinflationary policies succeeded in decreasing the inflation rate in December 2005 to 7.7%,
     even though tax on alcohol and tobacco increased and oil prices soared. This process was
     driven by a tight fiscal policy, major improvements in productivity, and the strength of the
     lira. However, a weaker lira and higher energy prices have recently reversed this process.
     Consumer price inflation rose to around 10% by August 2006. Additional pressures,
     particularly from the exchange rate make it very difficult to reach the official end-of-year
     target for consumer price inflation of 5%. After strong disinflation, inflation has recently
     increased.

     In previous years, the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) had been very successful in reducing
     inflationary pressures. The CBT implemented a new policy framework of inflation targeting
     as from 1 January 2006. This was to make its policy more transparent. It uses short-term
     interest rates as a main instrument. Most members of the monetary committee and the CBT
     board, including the governor, have been recently appointed. The new policy framework,
     together with the new board, shifted market perception of monetary risk. This change, in
     combination with the globally worsening perception of emerging markets, led to a sharp
     depreciation of the lira. The exchange rate against the euro fell by about 25% in May-June
     2006, but significantly recovered in the following months. The CBT has increased overnight
     borrowing and lending rates by 425 and 625 basis points respectively. Financial markets have
     recently been very volatile.

     Consolidation of public finances has been on track. The 2005 primary surplus target of 6.5%
     of GNP (IMF methodology) was roughly reached, and the general government budget deficit
     declined from 5.7% of GDP in 2004 to 1.2% of GDP in 2005 (according to EU standards).
     The increase in the fiscal consolidation in 2005 stems mainly from a faster decrease in real
     domestic interest rates. The budget for 2006 is designed to achieve a similar public sector
     primary surplus. Targets for the first half of 2006 have almost been reached, in spite of the
     significant rise in interest rates. The laws on the social security framework were approved in
     spring 2006. These are an important step forward in the consolidation process, provided they
     are implemented in full. Overall, fiscal consolidation has been strong.

     General government gross debt fell markedly from 76.9% of GDP at the end of 2004 to
     69.6% at the end of 2005 (ESA 95 methodology). The main factors have been a significant
     primary surplus, strong GDP growth and falling interest rates. Various rating agencies have
     upgraded the rating for Turkey. Turkey has subsequently launched various sovereign bonds
     on the international market. The average maturity of debt is therefore lengthening rapidly,
     including on domestic borrowing, to over 30 months by mid-2006. Almost 40% of public debt
     is denominated in foreign currency in mid-2006, compared to over 45% in 2003. This
     illustrates a further shift to domestic currency and decreasing vulnerabilities. The risk to
     macroeconomic and financial stability has been further reduced due to improvements in the
     public debt structure and maturities.

     Measures to increase fiscal transparency have continued. Emphasis has been put on the
     implementation of legislation adopted, in particular the Public Financial Management and
     Financial Control Law. Several coordinating and controlling bodies have been created within
     the Ministry of Finance to enhance efficiencies and transparency. This has resulted in an
     improvement in budget preparation. Overall, fiscal transparency has improved.




EN                                                27                                                  EN
      Free interplay of market forces

     The government has confirmed the independence of regulatory and surveillance agencies.
     Special privileges of state-owned banks are being phased out. State-owned enterprises
     account now for about 5% of GDP and about 15% of the value added in the manufacturing
     sector. State banks make up nearly one third of the value added in the banking sector. Staff in
     state enterprises and banks comprises only 2.5% of total employment. In sum, progress has
     been made with the free interplay of market forces.

     The share of administrated prices in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) basket amounts
     presently to 10.2% of the total weight of the CPI basket. Price reform is not complete. For
     example, electricity prices are far f below production costs and include cross-sector subsidies
     Price liberalisation is fairly advanced, but has not made much further progress.

     Free market entry and exit

     Privatisation receipts amounted to about 2.8% of GDP in 2005. Largest privatisations
     included the Tüpraş oil refinery and the steel and iron producer Erdemir. The privatisation of
     Turk Telekom has been finalised. Delays in the privatisation of electricity distribution were
     incurred. Public ownership in the business sector downscaled to 5%, excluding agriculture.
     Overall, significant privatisation continued. In 2005, almost 100 000 enterprises were
     established. More than 26 000 firms went bankrupt. These numbers were about 5% higher
     than in 2004. Restrictions on foreign ownership still exist in the areas of civil aviation,
     maritime transport, road transport, ground-handling services, yachting, broadcasting,
     electricity, financial corporations, private employment offices, tourism, education and defence
     sectors. Barriers to market exit have not been significantly reduced.

     Adequate legal system

     The legal system, including the regulation of property rights, is in place. However, the time
     lag is sometimes long between the adoption of framework legislation and its implementation.
     Courts, in particular the commercial courts, work relatively slowly. The enforceability of the
     decisions of the authorities and of courts continues to prove difficult. This is the same for
     foreign investors. The expert witness system has evolved into a parallel semi-judicial
     structure. Training of judicial personnel is not always adequate. This hampers a swift
     settlement of commercial cases. The implementation of the legislation on property rights,
     including intellectual property rights, is not appropriate. Overall, the implementation of laws
     and contracts should be further improved.

     Sufficiently developed financial sector

     Banking credits rose to 110% of GDP in the first quarter of 2006 compared with 82% in the
     same period of last year. Efficiency of the financial intermediation has been increasing, as
     shown by the gradual decline in spreads between average lending and deposit rates from 6%
     in 2004 to 4.6% by end 2005. Increased foreign participation in the banking sector has
     enhanced competition. Majority-owned foreign banks accounted for about 15% of Turkish
     banking assets in mid-2006, compared with 5% in 2004. However, the return on assets and on
     equity declined. This indicates declining profit margins for the banks. The banking sector has
     strengthened considerably and financial intermediation substantially improved.




EN                                                 28                                                  EN
      The stock market has grown in recent years, but it remains small with just 289 companies
     listed on the main board at the end of September 2006. The companies listed include leading
     conglomerates and banks and a few large state-controlled companies. Market capitalisation is
     relatively low with about 50% of GDP in 2006. This is in spite of the massive increases in the
     main share price index in 2003-05. Banks and multinationals lead the small insurance sector.
     The insurance sector is currently regulated by the Treasury. The non-banking financial sector
     has further grown.

     Supervision of the financial sector has benefited from a new Banking Law. This law was
     adopted by the Parliament in October 2005. Consequently, the requirements and supervision
     will be significantly enhanced as soon as the law is fully implemented. Most of the secondary
     regulations have been put in place in 2006.The regulations which establish that the regulatory
     and supervisory power on financial holding, leasing, factoring and consumer finance
     companies are to be transferred to the Banking Regulation and Supervisory Agency (BRSA)
     are in place. Overall, supervision of the financial sector has been further strengthened.

     3.2.2.   The capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union

     Existence of a functioning market economy

     As a result of structural reforms and the process of macroeconomic stabilisation, the corporate
     and investment climate has been gradually improving. However, certain features which distort
     the functioning of markets, remained, such as low transparency regarding state aids. They
     constrain the competitiveness of the economy. Recent financial market fluctuations also
     added some uncertainty to the environment in which the private and public sector operates,
     but also in fact underlined the improved shock resilience of the economy. Overall, the
     functioning of market forces continued to improve.

     Sufficient human and physical capital

     Spending on education increased and some reforms were made. The government plans
     increased expenditure on education from 8.8% of total expenditure in 2004 to 12.4% in 2006.
     This increase not only reflects rising costs of a growing young population, but also started to
     enhance coverage and quality of education. Reforms include an increase of secondary
     education from three to four years. However, considerable income- gender- and regional
     differences in educational attainment and in the quality of education persist. The average
     knowledge level for pupils in secondary education is still low. Weaknesses in quality,
     transparency and accessibility of higher education remain significant. To summarize, reforms
     and increased spending on education are generating some positive impact on educational
     attainment, but significant problems remained.

     Labour force participation rates are low, particularly for women and older people, and
     declined further in 2005 and 2006. In addition, the fast-growing working-age population and
     the move out of agriculture sector create a strong need for job creation. There has been little
     systematic effort to reduce the substantial employment in the informal economy. No
     significant changes has been made to the labour framework. The legal focus remains on
     protecting jobs and less than 4% of unemployed workers get unemployment benefits. The
     non-wage costs of hiring labour remain large. Active labour market policies are small in scope
     and have had limited success in reducing unemployment. To conclude, the situation in the
     labour market remains challenging and policy responses have been limited.




EN                                                 29                                                  EN
      Investment continued to be strong in 2005. Gross fixed capital formation amounted to around
     20% of nominal GDP. This reflected strong private capital formation which equalled 15.3%
     of nominal GDP. FDI inflows increased significantly in 2005, to 2.8% of GDP from a low
     0.8% in 2004. The privatisation process proceeded in the first half of 2006 and supported
     continued strong inflows. The cumulative stock of FDI was around € 1 300 per capita in 2005.
     Foreign ownership was most prominent in the wholesale and retail sectors where 36% of the
     companies with foreign ownership operated. Overall, investment - both domestic and foreign
     financed - grew strongly.

     Infrastructure investments have been suppressed to support the primary surplus target. No
     significant changes occurred concerning road and rail network. The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
     pipeline was finalised which was an important addition to the energy infrastructure. Mobile
     phone penetration continued to grow to 64% in March 2006. Internet subscribers increased
     from 1% to 2% of the population. Spending on R&D remained low. A strategy has been
     defined on how to strengthen efforts and outcomes in this area. Public spending on R&D is
     budgeted to increase by 20% in 2006. So far, improvements in infrastructure have been
     modest.

     Adequate sectoral and enterprise structure

     Progress was made with the structural transformation of the economy. The share of
     agriculture in employment decreased markedly during 2005, from 33% to 26% of total
     employment. This trend continued in 2006. Jobs were created in the industrial sector
     (including construction) and its share in the total labour force rose from 18% to 26% in 2005.
     However, job creation in industry and services was not strong enough to fully compensate for
     the reduction in agricultural employment. The share of agriculture in GDP decreased from
     11.7% to 10.7%. Industry gained in importance, increasing from 29.7% of GDP to 31.2%.
     Services remained stable at around 58% of GDP. In summary, the process of structural
     transformation of the economy accelerated.

     Small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) accounted for over 75% of employment but only
     27% of value added15 Many SMEs operate in the informal economy, which restrains their
     ability to improve productivity. Access to finance for SMEs improved as the banking sector
     expanded its lending activities. However, bank loans still only cover about 10% of SME's
     financing needs. Owner's capital remains the major source of financing. Collateral
     requirements and high interest rates are the most important factors which hamper borrowing.
     Overall, small and medium-size enterprises (SME) remained an important cornerstone of the
     economy, but their efficiency was often low and informality widespread.

     Enterprise restructuring advanced and was supported by privatisation in some areas, such as
     the telecom sector. Some progress was achieved in restructuring and preparing privatisation of
     the state owned banks, but the process was delayed compared to the planned schedule. Efforts
     to restructure and liberalise the energy sector also fell behind schedule. Some of the main
     outstanding problems in the sector concerns cross-subsidies and large distribution losses. In
     the private sector, strong productivity gains indicated that restructuring of companies made
     progress. Overall, the restructuring process continued.




     15
            Figures for 2004, no later data available.



EN                                                       30                                           EN
      State influence on competitiveness

     The work of the Competition Authority continued to be satisfactory and its role in the market
     was further supported by the privatisation process. Transparency in the corporate sector
     improved and accounting standards were upgraded although not yet fully implemented. No
     improvements were made concerning monitoring of state aids. The absence of transparent
     monitoring and policies to decrease distortions negatively affects the competitive climate.
     Public procurement policies continued to be undermined by further exceptions made to the
     regulatory framework. To conclude, some improvements in competition policy took place, but
     in certain areas deficiencies remained or worsened.

     Trade integration with the EU

     Exports and imports of goods equalled around 54% of GDP in 2005, up by about 3%. The
     share of exports destined for the EU declined from 54.5% in 2004 to 52.4% in 2005 as exports
     to some other markets rose more rapidly. Imports from the EU as a share of total imports also
     declined, from 46.6% to 42.2%. The EU remained Turkey's largest trading partner, but other
     markets are gaining in importance. Overall, trade openness continued to increase and the trade
     partners were diversified.

     Labour productivity improved and rose by 8% in the manufacturing sector during the year.
     Productivity in the public sector also continued to improve, where the number of employees
     decreased by 7% while productivity increased by 10%. The real effective exchange rate
     (REER) based on Unit Labour Cost rose considerably until February 2006. Due to sharp
     exchange rate depreciation, which started in May, this trend was then strongly reversed. Some
     strength was regained in July and August, but the REER was still at levels similar to end
     2004. In summary, labour productivity continued to rise and the trend of increasing real
     effective exchange rate was strongly reversed.


     4.       ABILITY TO ASSUME THE OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP

     This section examines Turkey's ability to assume the obligations of membership – that is, the
     acquis as expressed in the Treaties, the secondary legislation, and the policies of the Union. It
     also analyses Turkey's administrative capacity to implement the acquis. The analysis is
     structured in accordance with the list of the 33 acquis chapters.

     4.1.     Chapter 1: Free movement of goods
     Limited progress can be reported in area of general principles applying to free movement of
     goods.
     The new regime of technical regulations and standardisation aims at alignment with EU safety
     rules for products imported from third countries (Regulation (EEC) No 339/93), as well as
     with general principles. As a consequence, the number of products subject to mandatory
     standards or technical specifications upon import, and all sectors included, has been reduced
     by more than a half.
     In principle, products which are in free circulation in the EU, bearing “e”, “E” or “CE”
     marking are exempted from conformity assessment procedures. However, implementing
     provisions and administrative requirements introduce limitations to the free circulation of
     these products.



EN                                                  31                                                   EN
      Good progress was made on horizontal measures. In the area of standardisation, the number
     of mandatory standards declined significantly, in particular in the area of New Approach,
     where they decreased from 300 in 2005 to 29 in 2006. The remaining mandatory standards are
     mainly in the area of construction products. Turkish Standards Institute (TSE) further adopted
     EN standards of the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN), the European
     Committee for Electro technical Standardisation (CENELEC) and the European
     Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI). About 90 % of CEN and 88% of CENELEC
     standards are now adopted.

     In terms of conformity assessment, substantial progress was achieved, albeit for a limited
     number of activities and sectors. Turkey can now notify conformity assessment bodies to the
     European Commission.

     Regarding accreditation, some progress can be noted. TURKAK, the national accreditation
     agency, signed the multilateral agreements (MLA) of the European Accreditation Cooperation
     (EA) on calibration laboratories, testing laboratories, quality systems certification bodies and
     inspection bodies.

     Limited progress took place in the area of metrology, and related administrative capacity.
     Some progress can be reported regarding market surveillance. The Ministry of Industry and
     Trade, through its network of provincial offices, carried out market surveillance activities.
     The Ministry of Health started implementing its market surveillance strategy in the area of
     toys and medical devices, and the Telecommunication Authority continued its comprehensive
     market surveillance activities. Very limited progress took place concerning market
     surveillance for construction and for personal protective equipment. Numerous organisations
     are involved in market surveillance. Administrative capacity of the Ministries concerned is
     sufficient. However, their organisation and coordination is lagging behind to perform
     effective market surveillance duties.

     Some progress took place in the area of new approach product legislation. Provisions
     entered into force for marine equipment, toys and childcare articles made of soft PVC.
     Harmonised standards on toys, pressure vessels, pressure equipment and gas appliances gas
     meters, as well as weights further clarifying the legislation, were published in the Official
     Gazette for information to the industry. However, practices constituting technical barriers to
     trade continued. These include verification fees on measuring instruments. The regulations on
     pre-packaged products are implemented.

     Limited progress can be reported in the area of pharmaceuticals. The legislation for medicinal
     products for human use is well advanced. However, the uncertainty linked to the authorisation
     regime applied to a number of generics, for which a market authorisation was requested
     before 1 January 2005, continues to constitute a source of concern and disagreement. No
     development can be reported in other areas, especially on medicinal products for veterinary
     use, chemicals, cosmetics and veterinary pharmaceuticals.

     There was additional progress concerning sectoral regulations in new approach area.
     Alignment is generally advanced, and completed in some sectors.

     The alignment of old approach product legislation is advanced. Limited further progress
     took place. Some progress was achieved regarding motor vehicles. However, the requirements
     of control certificates in various sectors are partially not in line with the acquis and constitutes
     a technical barrier to trade which is not in line with Turkey's Customs Union obligations.



EN                                                   32                                                     EN
      As regards procedural measures, and in particular the notification procedure, the alignment
     with provisions on information in the field of technical standards and regulations progressed.
     An increase in notifications was registered.

     In the non harmonised area, no progress has taken place and provisions on mutual
     recognition and notification remain to be adopted.

     There was no progress regarding cultural goods and firearms.

     Turkey continued to deny vessels and aircraft flying the Cyprus flag, or whose last port of call
     was in Cyprus, access to its ports. Such restrictions on shipping often preclude the most
     economical way of transport and therefore result in a barrier to the free movement of goods
     and to trade. They infringe the Customs Union Decision.

     Conclusion

     Progress has been uneven. There were improvements in areas such as accreditation,
     standardisation and conformity assessment, as well as areas under the new approach directives
     where the number of compulsory standards reduced drastically. However, the identification
     and the removal of provisions contrary to the general principles of free circulation of products
     and mutual recognition has not been completed. Remaining import licensing requirements are
     contrary to Articles 28 to 30 of the EC Treaty. Technical barriers to trade continue.

     The conformity assessment structures have been developed, and allow the designation of the
     Turkish notified bodies in some areas, for a limited number of activities.

     The relevant ministries, especially the Ministry of Industry and Trade, intensified their efforts
     towards the implementation of market surveillance. Nevertheless, an effective market
     surveillance system in conformity with the new approach principles is not yet in place
     throughout the country.

     4.2.     Chapter 2: Freedom of movement for workers

     There are no developments on access to labour market. Several laws, as well as the role of
     professional organisations, contain restrictions on the free movement of foreign workers.

     Modernisation of the Public Employment Services continued. Staff training for future
     participation in the EURES (European Employment Services) network requires attention.

     As regards co-ordination of social security systems, the new social security reform laws
     contain elements regulating the conditions of work and social security rights of foreign
     nationals. Foreign nationals residing in Turkey for more than a year will be covered under the
     Universal Health Insurance Law.

     Conclusion

     Limited progress has been achieved on this chapter. Progress was mainly realised in the area
     of co-ordination of social security systems. Alignment is at an early stage. The administrative
     capacity needs to be strengthened.




EN                                                  33                                                   EN
      4.3.     Chapter 3: Right of establishment and freedom to provide services

     No new developments can be reported in the area of right of establishment. The Law on
     Work Permits of Foreigners in principle exempts self-employed EU nationals from the
     requirement to obtain a work permit. However, such exemptions are, according to the
     interpretation of the Turkish administration, subject to reciprocity requirements. The Ministry
     of Labour and Social Security is the responsible body for foreigners’ work permits.

     As regards company registration requirements, restrictions continued limiting the right of
     establishment for foreigners. Sectoral legislation requires economic operators to obtain a
     licence or an authorisation, including mandatory membership in a chamber of commerce,
     trade association or in another professional organisation. In some sectors, foreign nationals
     cannot provide services even if their company is established in Turkey. Certain professions
     are closed to foreign nationals. In this area, overall alignment with the acquis is limited.

     No particular developments took place concerning the freedom to provide cross-border
     services. Service providers are generally required to obtain a licence or authorisation, also for
     temporary provision of services. This is mostly linked to mandatory membership in a
     professional organisation. Foreign companies providing services on a temporary basis are also
     required to register with the relevant association, i.e. the Union of Chamber and Commodity
     Exchanges of Turkey (TOBB). The Law on Craftsmen and Artisans was amended. Craftsmen
     and tradesmen registered with a given Chamber are now free to exercise their activities in the
     whole country. However, authorisation procedures are cumbersome. Overall, alignment with
     the acquis is limited in this area.

     In the area of postal services, there was no particular development. Turkey has not started
     aligning its legislation. A legal monopoly (without weight limit) continued in the postal
     sector. The Directorate General of PTT is the only universal service provider. However, in
     practice there is de facto private sector activity in express mail and private parcel delivery.
     Turkey has no independent regulatory authority to ensure compliance with the Postal
     Directive and guarantee fair competition. A lack of transparency in the accounting system
     prevents tracing potential distortions resulting from abuses of a dominant market position, or
     from cross-subsidisation. Overall, the acquis is not aligned in this area.

     Turkey has not developed a roadmap for the implementation of the postal services acquis as
     indicated in the accession partnership.

     Limited progress was made in the area of regulated professions. Turkey’s legal framework
     does not incorporate an overall framework concerning the recognition of foreign professional,
     as opposed to educational, qualifications. A law, entrusting the administration of occupational
     standards to a new independent authority, was adopted in September 2006. However, the
     sectoral directives for regulated professions were not transposed, and the minimal training
     requirements for health sector professions are not aligned with the acquis. Administrative
     structures for recognition of foreign qualifications are limited to academic recognition, the
     structure to certify the professional qualifications and to handle recognition requests
     submitted by non-nationals are not in place. Nationality requirements for professions such as
     lawyers, medical doctors, dentists and midwives, as well as for air traffic controllers and
     private security services are not in line with the acquis. Overall alignment in this area is
     limited.




EN                                                  34                                                   EN
      Conclusion

     Overall alignment with the acquis is limited. Alignment with the EC principles on the right of
     establishment and the freedom to provide services remains incomplete. There has been no
     progress in liberalising the postal services and the establishment of an independent regulatory
     authority. In the area of regulated professions limited progress was made, however, Turkish
     legislation takes a different approach to the acquis.

     4.4.     Chapter 4: Free movement of capital

     In the field of capital movements and payments, no progress can be reported. Turkey has
     important restrictions in areas such as outward capital movements, credit and cash
     transactions, foreign direct investment in a number of sectors, special government rights in
     privatised companies and real estate acquisition by foreigners.

     In the area of real estate, recently adopted legislation was a step backwards. The amended
     Land Registry Law introduces the principle of reciprocity for acquisition of real estate in
     Turkey by foreigners and it brings stricter limitations to this right, concerning, inter alia, the
     maximum size of land that can be owned by foreigners, and the location of the property. For
     foreign commercial companies, in addition to the restrictions stated in the Land Registry Law,
     acquisition of real estate should also comply with the provisions stated in sectoral legislation.
     These include the Petroleum Law, the Law for the Support of Tourism, and the Law on
     Industrial Zones. The Council of Ministers, with an aim to protect public interest and national
     security, can restrict the sale of a specific piece of land.

     Preparations for alignment in the area of capital movements and payments are underway. In
     the area of payment systems and cross-border transfers, limited progress can be reported. The
     new Banking Law authorises the Turkish Banking Association to establish an out-of-court
     dispute settlement body for customer complaints on cross-border credit transfers. However,
     this body has not been established yet.

     In the field of fight against money laundering no progress was made in alignment of
     legislation, which remains partial. Lack of effective enforcement mechanisms is the major
     problem in the area of money laundering in Turkey. Some progress was registered in
     reporting of suspicious transactions (352 reports notified to the Financial Crimes Investigation
     Board –MASAK-, compared to 290 in 2004). However, this reporting activity is modest and
     limited to the banking sector. Prosecutions were brought in 33 cases, compared to 41 cases in
     2004. Convictions, confiscations, seizures and freezing of assets, also remain limited.

     Conclusion

     Very limited progress has taken place. Important restrictions exist in the area of movement of
     capital, including on acquisition of real estate by foreigners. Alignment with respect to
     payment systems is limited. Alignment of legislation against money laundering is incomplete.
     The investigation capacity of law enforcement bodies, as well as inter-agency and
     international cooperation is weak. Overall alignment is limited. Preparations for alignment in
     the area of capital movements and payments require further attention.




EN                                                  35                                                    EN
      4.5.    Chapter 5: Public procurement

     No progress can be reported on general principles. A number of derogations from the acquis
     were introduced to the Turkish Public Procurement Law through various sectoral laws.
     Among these, a law amending the Public Financial Management and Control Law exempted
     certain contract award procedures by the Turkish Petroleum Corporation. The Law
     Establishing the Regional Development Agencies (for the co-ordination of the development
     activities across Turkey) exempts any acquisition of goods and services of the agencies from
     the scope of the Public Procurement Law. The Law establishing an Investment Support and
     Promotion Agency similarly exempts this agency. Moreover, the Public Procurement Law
     still includes discriminatory elements for foreign bidders.

     No progress can be noted with regard to the award of public contracts. The Public
     Procurement Agency updated thresholds and financial limits for procurement, which
     remained above EC levels. This reduces the opportunities for foreign bidders to apply.
     Furthermore, complicated and expensive qualification procedures continued to constitute a
     bureaucratic obstacle to wider competition in public tenders.

     Discrepancies between the Turkish public procurement legislation and the acquis exist in
     various aspects. Some of the basic definitions, such as that of contracting entity and
     procurement contracts, are not in line with EU Directives. There is no clear legislative
     framework for concessions in general nor for utilities. A reference to the public works
     concessions in the Public Procurement Law is absent.

     Regarding administrative capacity, the effectiveness of the Public Procurement Authority
     (PPA) is undermined by weak co-ordination at the policy-making level. The PPA and the
     TOBB Education and Technology University manage a certificate programme for the
     potential bidders on public procurement practices.

     There is no new development to be reported in the area of remedies. Review procedures are
     not in line with the acquis. Complaints submitted to the Public Procurement Board amounted
     to 2 135 out of 115 639 tenders announced in 2005. In comparison to the previous year, the
     number of complaints increased by 47%.

     Conclusion

     Very limited progress can be reported in this chapter. Aspects of the procurement system in
     Turkey were weakened, in particular due to a narrower scope of application of the Turkish
     public procurement legislation stemming from the introduction of sectoral exemptions.

     The capacity of the administrative structures established by the Public Procurement Law is
     lagging behind. The PPA is not in a position to ensure a consistent policy in all areas related
     to public procurement, nor does it effectively steer the implementation of the procurement
     legislation. Progress is needed in setting up an organisation for procurement to ensure a
     coherent policy in all areas related to public procurement, establishing a comprehensive
     strategy as well as amending the scope of legislation to ensure that all relevant areas are
     covered.




EN                                                 36                                                  EN
      4.6.    Chapter 6: Company law

     In the field of company law, there has been no progress in aligning Turkey's legal framework
     pending the adoption of the new Turkish Commercial Code. Company registers (operated by
     Chambers of Commerce) do not have the technical infrastructure to fulfil acquis requirements
     in this field.

     Some progress can be reported in the area of accounting. The Turkish Accounting Standards
     Board (TASB) has so far adopted almost all International Accounting Standards (IAS) and
     International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). However, these are not legally binding
     nor generally applied by Turkish Companies. Moreover, Turkish accounting and auditing
     professions are unable to apply the acquis due to gaps in education and training programmes.

     Turkey does not have a general purpose accounting framework that corresponds to
     internationally accepted accounting principles. Most companies report on the basis of tax-
     based requirements. Publicly held companies prepare reports in accordance with requirements
     set by the Capital Markets Board (CMB). Accounting requirements for banks are set by the
     Banking Regulatory and Supervisory Authority (BRSA). Both are largely in compliance with
     IAS/IFRS. However, the legislation contains some divergences, in particular as regards the
     consolidation perimeter for banks, which excludes non-financial group companies.

     Some progress can be reported regarding the administrative capacity of TASB. It moved to
     permanent premises and the number of staff increased, and further recruitment is continuing.
     Disclosure requirements will need to be enhanced.

     Limited progress was made in the area of auditing. In June 2006, the CMB issued the
     Communiqué on Independent Auditing Standards in the capital market, introducing the
     International Standards of Audit (ISAs) set by the International Federation of Accountants.
     The BRSA adopted implementing legislation on audit principles. CMB and BRSA require the
     accounts of, respectively, listed companies and banks to be audited. However, there is no
     general purpose framework consistent with internationally accepted auditing practices and the
     regulatory framework for the auditing profession remains to be significantly upgraded.

     Independent audit companies are subject to quality control inspections of the CMB regarding
     their reports on publicly held joint stock corporations. Inspections are conducted on a random
     basis or upon concerns on the quality of reports. These inspections are held by the Accounting
     and Auditing Standards Department of the CMB, which had a total staff of 7 in 2005 (9 in
     2004). However, only 614 (2005) of around 2 048 059 (2005) companies are publicly held
     joint stock corporations (See also Chapter 9 - Financial Services).

     Conclusion

     Limited progress can be reported for this chapter, and concentrated in the area of accounting.

     International accounting standards of IFRS and ISA were adopted. However, they are not
     legally binding for the majority of Turkish companies and enforcement was not consistent.
     The awareness of the business community, investors and of the general public is modest. The
     overall level of alignment is limited, both for company law and corporate financial reporting.




EN                                                 37                                                 EN
      4.7.     Chapter 7: Intellectual property law

     Limited further progress was made in legislative alignment with provisions concerning
     copyright and related rights. As regards implementation, the Regulation on Procedures and
     Principles for Banderol Applications was amended, easing the conditions necessary for
     affixing banderols. A regulation on Record and Registration of Intellectual and Artistic Works
     was published. Now certain works must be registered in order to be protected, which is in
     contradiction with the Rome Convention.

     Frequent changes in the legislation reduced its predictability and enforceability. The
     regulatory framework of collecting societies is not sufficient, nor precise. The surveillance
     over collecting societies is insufficient. Conflicts about representation of right owners by
     collecting societies continued.

     Overall, Turkey has aligned its legislation concerning copyright and neighbouring rights to a
     large extent. Weak administrative capacity, frequent and inconsistent changes of legislation,
     as well as conflicts over collective management of rights remained as problematic issues.

     Little progress can be reported concerning industrial property rights (IPR). Awareness
     raising seminars for SMEs, right holders, and the general public, continued taking place. As
     regards administrative capacity, the Turkish Patent Institute (TPI) improved its IT structure
     and online services. The databases of registered industrial designs, trade marks and patents
     have been opened to the public for preliminary search of earlier rights and the state of play of
     the rights. This facility reduces the costs of the applicants remarkably and shortens the
     application process. However, some shortcomings exist concerning TPI functioning, in
     particular concerning appeal and opposition procedures for trade mark applications. These are
     lengthy, and the justification of decisions is insufficient. Moreover, a number of bad faith
     and/or non-distinctive design applications were registered that can only be cancelled by court
     decisions.

     Concerning enforcement, provincial anti-piracy commissions are not functioning effectively.
     The third IPR civil court was established as such, but the number of these courts and their
     logistical infrastructures is insufficient. Difficulties remain in obtaining search and seizure
     warrants from non-specialised lower courts. Training of judges needs to be strengthened.

     The national police continued its raids in enforcing intellectual and industrial property rights
     and in training its staff. However, piracy and counterfeiting are not addressed in the context of
     the fight against organised crime and overall capacity of law enforcement agencies remains
     inadequate. As a result a substantial share of the Turkish market for books and music belongs
     to pirate traders.

     Conclusion

     The legislative alignment in this chapter is already well advanced. No further progress was
     made to increase the level of alignment in the area of copyright and industrial property rights.
     Administrative capacity improved, but remains insufficient in particular for copyright and
     related rights. Effective enforcement of legislation is overall insufficient. Gaps remain as
     regards proper implementation of the legislation by non-specialised lower courts, and
     recourse to expert witnesses is abused. Coordination and cooperation should be further
     strengthened between relevant bodies i.e. the Ministry of Justice and the judiciary, the police,
     the Ministry of Finance, the Under-secretariat for Customs, municipalities and right owners.



EN                                                  38                                                   EN
      4.8.     Chapter 8: Competition Policy

     Progress in the field of competition policy since last year’s report presents a mixed picture.

     In the field of anti-trust, including mergers, progress can be reported with regard to
     legislative alignment. The Competition Authority aligned its block exemption legislation on
     motor vehicle distribution with the acquis. The Competition Authority also revised its
     communiqué on administrative fines to increase their levels as from end 2006. However,
     legislative alignment is needed on sector specific block exemption rules in insurance,
     telecommunications and postal services, as well as the incorporation of rules on horizontal
     cooperation agreements and de minimis. As regards enforcement activities, the Competition
     Authority continued to impose fines for the infringement of competition rules, e.g. in the steel
     sector. The level of alignment in the field of anti-trust is high.

     The Competition Authority continued to play an active role in merger control; especially
     important were privatisation cases which made its presence more visible among market
     actors. With regard to legislative alignment, the Competition Authority amended the merger
     control regulation in order to allow for fines regarding mergers not notified to the
     Competition Authority. Furthermore, if it is detected that merger approval is based on
     misinformation by applicants, the Competition Authority may re-launch merger investigation
     and prohibit the merger.

     The Competition Authority has administrative and operational independence. It has a
     sufficient administrative capacity to ensure antitrust enforcement and merger control. The
     authority places high emphasis on continuous training of its staff. The commitment by all
     public and legislative authorities to remove and avoid legal barriers to competition will be
     better ensured if the Authority’s opinions concerning drafts of all types of legislation, which
     may have an impact on competition, are taken into account in a consistent way.

     The administrative capacity of the Supreme Administrative Court continued to be a matter of
     concern. Handling of appealed competition cases is slow.

     No development can be recorded with regard to the alignment of rules concerning public
     undertakings and undertakings having exclusive and special rights. Turkey needs to ensure
     transparency of financial relations between public authorities and public undertakings.

     As regards the enforcement record, in 2005 the Competition Authority adopted a total of 317
     decisions, including competition infringements (97), negative clearances (50) and decisions
     on mergers and acquisitions (170). The Competition Authority imposed fines in 12 cases
     amounting to a total of 25 040 479 Turkish Lira (around 12.5 million Euros).

     No developments can be reported with regard to the adoption of state aid legislation or the
     establishment of an operationally independent state aid monitoring authority. Their absence
     delays the adoption of implementing rules for competition under the Customs Union Decision
     1/95, and results in serious distortions of competition.

     Legislation was modified to suspend the possibility of giving new investment encouragement
     certificates to the steel industry. However, companies continued to benefit from the effects of
     old certificates. Turkey has not ensured a satisfactory level of transparency on state aid
     granted to the sector which it committed to in the 1996 ECSC-Turkey Free Trade Agreement.




EN                                                  39                                                  EN
      On 31 August 2006, Turkey sent to the Commission a National Restructuring Programme for
     the Turkish steel industry. The Programme is being analysed by the Commission services.

     Conclusion

     Harmonisation with the anti-trust acquis is well advanced. The Law on Protection of
     Competition and the regulation on mergers and acquisitions reflect the main principles of
     Community rules. The level of enforcement by the Competition Authority continued to be
     satisfactory. As regards State aid, there has been no progress since the last report. Turkey has
     not set up the necessary legislative framework and administrative structures to ensure
     transparency and implement Community state aid rules.

     4.9.     Chapter 9: Financial Services

     Some progress can be reported in the area of banking. A new Banking Law entered into force
     which reduced the maximum credit limit for parent undertakings to EU standards. In addition,
     the new law introduced risk based supervision, the end of the sworn-bank auditors’ monopoly
     in on-site supervision, and the establishment of a financial sector commission to improve co-
     operation among financial sector supervisory authorities. Some progress was made with
     regard to the adoption of new implementing regulations through the Banking Regulatory and
     Supervisory Authority (BRSA), including secondary legislation on systems audit principles.
     The exclusion of non-financial group companies from the perimeter of banks' consolidated
     accounts undermines the effective supervision of banks that form part of mixed-holding
     groups (see also Chapter 6 – Company law). The BRSA increased its staff and published a
     Strategic Plan for 2006-09 setting out broad strategic goals. The entry into force of a new
     statute for the Turkish Banking Association is a positive development since it intends to end
     discrimination against foreign owned banks. Supervisory practices, in particular concerning
     consolidated supervision are at an early stage. Overall alignment with the acquis is partial in
     the area of banking.

     Some progress can be reported in the area of insurance and supplementary pensions. A new
     solvency regime was adopted for insurance, reinsurance, and occupational pension
     companies. It resembles the EU Solvency-I framework that is currently in force, but it is also
     inspired by the ongoing Solvency-II study. The current Insurance Supervision Law is
     outdated; several provisions have been annulled by court decisions. Turkey has no specific
     legislation on the supervision of insurance groups, consolidated insurance accounting and
     reinsurance. The latter is currently regulated as non-life insurance. As far as specific non-life
     insurance acquis is concerned, Turkey has no provisions on co-insurance, credit insurance,
     legal expense insurance and tourist assistance. The Undersecretariat of the Treasury regulates
     and supervises the insurance sector, including supplementary pensions. Within the Treasury,
     the General Directorate of Insurance (GDI) is responsible for regulatory activities and off-site
     supervision, whereas the Insurance Auditory Board (IAB) conducts on-site monitoring
     activities. Their enforcement capacity, independence and co-ordination are at an early stage.
     Even though there has been some progress, alignment with the acquis is limited in the area of
     insurance.

     Some progress can be reported in the area of securities market and investment services.
     The issuance of the first private sector corporate bond in the last ten years is a welcome
     development. The adoption of provisions that offer more information to customers, and
     eliminations of restrictions on participation limits for brokerage houses, were other positive
     steps. However, progress is at an early stage, in particular regarding investor compensation



EN                                                  40                                                   EN
      scheme, cross border provision of services, disclosure requirements, and prospectuses. The
     alignment with the market abuse directive is limited. The administrative and judicial capacity
     to enforce capital market legislation is not fully sufficient.

     The Capital Markets Board (CMB) regulates and supervises investment services and
     securities markets in Turkey. The administrative capacity of the CMB as supervisory
     authority is reasonably developed, but will require attention as further progress is made to
     align Turkish legislation with the acquis. The co-operation between the various supervisory
     authorities is underdeveloped.

     The area of investment services and securities markets is partially aligned with the acquis.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made some progress in this chapter. A new banking law was adopted. In the
     insurance and supplementary pension sector the adoption of relevant solvency legislation is
     also an improvement. However, overall the alignment of insurance legislation is limited. In
     the area of investment services and securities markets the investor compensation scheme,
     cross border provision of services, disclosure requirements, and prospectuses need further
     adaptation. Supervisory capacity is at an early stage, in particular in the insurance sector and
     as regards securities markets.

     4.10.    Chapter 10: Information society and media

     Some progress was made as regards electronic communications and information
     technologies. Turkey continued its alignment efforts with the introduction of new
     implementing legislation. An implementing regulation on 'rights of way' was published in
     May 2006. It also granted a large number of relevant licences, including infrastructure
     licences. Furthermore, carrier selection and carrier pre-selection is included in some of the
     recently concluded interconnection offers. However, only a small number of new market
     entrants have yet become operational. This means effective competition on the fixed
     telephony market is at an early stage. In addition, the implementation of competitive
     safeguards, such as local loop unbundling, number portability and cost accounting is still
     pending. In this area Turkish legislation is based on the 1998 EU regulatory framework. The
     Telecommunications Authority has adopted market analysis decisions based on this
     framework. However, these were carried out within the scope of the 2002 regulatory
     framework. Turkey has not adopted new legislation that would align it with the 2002
     framework.

     New decisions extending the scope of the universal service to include a national policy
     addressing computer illiteracy (including providing an exclusive right to one operator to
     deliver these services), as well as to include the development of digital broadcasting
     throughout Turkey, are not in line with the applicable EU provisions.

     The single European emergency call number '112' has been assigned as the single emergency
     call number, in addition to other emergency numbers, and can be reached free of charge.

     A majority of shares of Turk Telecom was sold to the private sector. In May 2006, mobile
     operator Telsim was acquired by Vodafone. While there is competition in the mobile market
     with three operators and a 63.7% penetration rate as of May 2006, there is less competition in
     the fixed-line market, mostly due to the fact that relevant competitive safeguards have not yet



EN                                                 41                                                   EN
      been introduced. The penetration rate for internet services has reached 15.5% as of May.
     Mainly due to a lack of competition broadband coverage is low, facing persistent quality
     problems and high pricing.

     The Telecommunications Authority increased its staff and now has 128 persons directly
     involved in regulatory work. With the expected entry of more market players, and with further
     alignment with the EU regulatory framework, its administrative capacity will require further
     monitoring. No progress can be reported on the administrative capacity of the Ministry of
     Transport. Alignment in this area is overall satisfactory at this stage.

     Market development continued to suffer from very high tax rates on communications, namely
     a 15% fixed telephony tax and a 25% mobile telephony tax on top of 18% VAT. In addition,
     different further taxes are levied, especially from mobile operators.

     As regards information society services, Turkey adopted an Information Society Strategy
     and Action Plan in June 2006. Turkey is not aligned with EU standards on electronic
     commerce and conditional services. Legislation on cyber crime is not adopted. Overall
     alignment in this area remains limited.

     In the area of media and audiovisual policy, Turkey's level of alignment with European
     standards and the EC audiovisual acquis is limited. Progress on most of the related priorities
     of the Accession Partnership is lagging behind considerably.

     Despite progress made in terms of legislation and the entry into force of the new Penal code,
     freedom of expression is not yet guaranteed by the current legal framework. Defamation is a
     criminal offence carrying prison sentences. In addition, the new Anti-Terror Law, recently
     adopted by the Parliament, expands the scope of crimes punishable as terrorist acts and
     includes restrictions on the news media. So far, the circulars issued by the Minister of Justice
     to the judiciary failed to ensure application of the provisions of the Penal Code in accordance
     with European standards (see also section on human rights and the protection of minorities).
     Alignment with such standards in the media area is very limited.

     Turkey's level of alignment with the audiovisual acquis remains limited to some provisions
     concerning advertising and the protection of minors. The Law on the Establishment of Radio
     and Television broadcast also poses problems in terms of definitions, jurisdiction, freedom of
     reception, major events, promotion of independent works and restrictions on the share of
     foreign capital in television enterprises. With regard to the administration of the broadcasting
     sector, the Radio and Television Higher Council (RTÜK) has so far not been able to re-
     allocate frequencies and review the temporary licences effectively.

     As regards access to radio/TV broadcasting, progress was achieved on broadcasts in
     languages other than Turkish at local and regional level. However, in accordance with the
     regulation on TV and radio broadcasting in other languages and dialects used by Turkish
     citizens (2004), TV broadcasts remain limited to 45 minutes per day, 4 hours a week. Radio
     broadcasts are limited to 60 minutes per day, 5 hours per week. The Radio and Television
     Higher Council (RTÜK) decided in May 2006 to lift these restrictions as far as music and
     cinematographic works are concerned. However, as this decision was not officially
     communicated to broadcasters, they refrained from exceeding the previous limitations for fear
     of sanctions. News and current events continue to be subject to time limitations. Live
     broadcasts are not banned, but rendered very difficult in practice by the requirement for
     subtitles or consecutive translation of all programmes. Broadcasts cannot be educational



EN                                                 42                                                   EN
      programmes teaching the Kurdish language or directed at children, and have to be
     accompanied by Turkish subtitles. An appeal against this regulation is pending. Out of twelve
     applications, three media outlets received authorisations and started broadcasting in Kurdish
     dialects (see also section on human rights and the protection of minorities).

     On the national level, the Public Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) is
     broadcasting in Bosnian, Arabic, Circassian, Kirmanji and Zaza. However, these emissions
     are limited to five days a week, 30-35 minutes daily and only cover news, sports, music and
     documentaries, and not, for example, children’s programmes.

     The issue of the independence, including adequate funding, of the Public Service Broadcaster
     TRT, and the Radio and Television Higher Council (RTÜK) remains a matter of concern.

     Conclusion

     Progress was made in this area. Turkey achieved a good basis for further alignment in
     electronic communications and information technologies. However, alignment in media and
     audiovisual policy remain very limited.

     4.11.    Chapter 11: Agriculture

     As regards legislative alignment, progress is uneven. Turkey adopted a new Agriculture Law
     to implement its "Agricultural Strategy Paper 2006-2010". The Law put emphasis on
     increasing productivity and ensuring food supply and gives lower priority to food safety and
     consumer related matters. It also moves Turkey further away from the principles of the
     reformed CAP by defining support linked to production as a key instrument of agriculture
     policy. On the positive side, it makes the competitiveness and modernisation of agricultural
     sector and rural areas a priority. It also creates the legal basis for certain management systems
     (Integrated Administrative Control System, Farm Accountancy Data Network) necessary for
     implementation of the acquis.

     The administrative capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) has not
     improved affecting the implementation of a number of EU-financed projects. The
     restructuring of the Ministry has been delayed. Unclear division of responsibilities, as well as
     conflicts of competencies between services, persist. Concerning horizontal issues, Turkey
     has made limited progress in aligning its legislation. Initial steps were taken to prepare the
     implementation of the Integrated Administration and Control System (IACS). The National
     Farmers Register System is not compliant with EU regulations. No progress can be reported
     on the setting up of the Farm Accountancy Data Network (FADN).

     Concerning bilateral trade relations, the main problem remains the Turkish technical barriers
     to trade on beef meat and live bovine animals that are not in line with bilateral obligations. In
     addition, special attention is needed on the mechanism operated by TMO to support exports of
     wheat flour. The difference between the domestic market price and the price at which
     exporters acquire the wheat is considered constituting a prohibited export subsidy. In addition,
     special attention is needed on the mechanism to support exports of wheat flour and its
     consistence with Turkey's commitments under the WTO.

     Limited progress was observed on the alignment with the common market organisations,
     which is understandable at this stage of the enlargement process. However, more transparency
     is required as regards existing intervention systems; special attention is needed in the area of



EN                                                  43                                                   EN
      public support to state economic enterprises such as the Turkish Grain Board (TMO).
     Bilateral assistance has started on the implementation of marketing standards for olives and
     olive oil. For fruit and vegetables, the conformity checks carried out by Turkey at export stage
     to the EU are in the process of being approved by the EU. This will facilitate the
     administrative customs procedures.

     Limited progress can be reported on rural development. A National Strategy was adopted on
     which an Action Plan and the financial Pre-Accession Assistance (IPARD) need to be built.
     The IPARD programming exercise started. Involvement of relevant stakeholders is at an early
     stage. As regards administrative structures, MARA has been designated as the Managing
     Authority for IPARD programme. Its staff has been appointed and needs to be further trained
     and assigned specific responsibilities. However, legislative work on the operating structures is
     not completed, including the necessary legal basis for the IPARD Agency. This could
     seriously delay the start of the accreditation process and consequently the use of IPARD funds
     in Turkey.

     No development can be reported in the field of quality policy. There was some progress on
     organic farming. Training programmes have started. The ongoing discussions for the future
     inclusion of Turkey in the third countries list of the EU have advanced. The final inclusion
     will allow the recognition of the Turkish certification system in the export of Turkish organic
     products to the EU.

     Conclusion

     The alignment with the acquis remains limited. Some limited progress has been achieved in
     the rural development field, but delays on the adoption of the necessary legislation and
     administrative structures put the timely implementation of IPARD seriously at risk. Most
     administrative structures related to the CAP have not yet been established. The trend towards
     increasing support linked to production goes against the direction of the 2003 CAP reform.
     Overall, preparations are at an early stage in this chapter.

     4.12.   Chapter 12: Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy

     In the legislative field, the "food, feed and veterinary package", foundation for future
     alignment with EU rules, has still not been adopted.

     Concerning general foodstuffs policy, progress remained limited in transposition and
     implementation. As regards participation in the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed, the
     lack of proper monitoring of alerts, and an insufficient network for information between the
     central and local units, remain.

     Regarding veterinary policy, no progress in alignment has been made. Turkey has
     concentrated on fighting disease outbreaks, such as Avian Influenza. No progress was noted
     in the area of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) and animal by-products.
     Turkey has been increasingly challenged on animal disease control measures. The first avian
     influenza (AI) outbreaks in October 2005 were handled efficiently with the help of a
     contingency plan. However, further outbreaks confirmed shortcomings. Coordination between
     the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and the Ministry of Health showed
     imperfections. More positively, information to the EU and other international organisations on
     AI was provided in a transparent manner. Also, the technical capacity of the AI reference
     laboratories increased. Vaccination campaigns against new strains of Food and Mouth



EN                                                 44                                                   EN
      Disease have been implemented. However new outbreaks put the foot-and-mouth disease
     (FMD) free status of Thrace in danger. For other diseases, such as brucellosis, sheep and goat
     plague, anthrax, sheep and goat pox, bluetongue, Newcastle disease and rabies, vaccination
     campaigns continued to be implemented.

     The identification and registration of bovines and the registration of their movements are in
     progress, however compliance with the acquis needs to be assessed. Furthermore, the control
     of movements of live animals, requires attention. No progress was observed regarding the
     registration of ovine and caprine animals even through preparatory work started. Regarding
     the financing of veterinary inspection and controls, no progress can be reported. Turkey’s
     current system is not in line with EU practises. Implementation concerning the veterinary
     checks on third country imports and rules for imports is not in line with EU rules. Alignment
     in this area remained limited.

     Turkey, as a third country, has shown significant improvement on the preparation of national
     residue monitoring plan. All active substances required by EU legislation have been included
     in the annual plans. The residue plan has been approved by the EU for milk and milk products
     and poultry. No progress on animal welfare can be reported.

     No substantial progress can be reported concerning the rules for placing on the market of
     food and feed. A vast majority of agri-food establishments need upgrading to meet EU
     hygiene requirements. Revisions of the food law as well as the clear definition of
     competences between the central authorities and municipalities are necessary to prevent gaps
     in hygiene and food controls and to ensure implementation of the acquis.

     On specific rules for food, legislation in the areas of labelling, presentation and advertising,
     additives and purity criteria, extraction solvents, quick frozen foodstuffs and irradiated food,
     is mostly in line with the acquis and implemented. Alignment in the area of mineral waters is
     quite advanced. Turkey has harmonised the legislation relating to food for particular
     nutritional uses. As regards flavourings and implementing legislation regarding food contact
     materials, the transposition of the acquis remains to be completed. Transposition of the acquis
     on food supplements has not yet started. Implementation of the acquis in the area of hygiene
     and official control has been limited. The regulation on market control of foodstuffs and
     packaging material is not fully aligned. On contaminants, the regulation on setting up the
     maximum limits for certain contaminants is in place. However further amendments are
     needed to follow EU practise. The legislation on official controls of contaminants is in line
     with the acquis. The plan on prevention of aflatoxin contamination continued to be
     implemented. However, problems remain on the ground. On genetically modified organisms
     (GMO) and novel foods, no progress can be reported regarding the transposition of the
     acquis.

     Some progress has been achieved in the area of specific rules for feed. Some progress has
     been achieved in the area of animal nutrition. Legislative alignment is further advanced
     concerning the additives for use in animal nutrition.

     Concerning phytosanitary issues limited progress has been made. Turkey has not aligned its
     legislation on quality of seeds and propagating materials, plant health, and plant protection
     and agricultural quarantine. An inspection manual was prepared and inspections at the borders
     were unified. The diagnostic capacity of plant health institutes was increased and brought in
     line with EU standards. Pest risk analysis started to be implemented. Training for the Ministry




EN                                                 45                                                   EN
      staff, for farmers and other private sector actors were organised. No developments can be
     reported regarding international agreements.

     As regards administrative capacity, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs has to be
     strengthened at central and local level. Reinforcement is particularly essential for
     implementing the general control tasks and achieving the EU requirements related to animal
     identification and animal diseases.




EN                                               46                                                EN
      Conclusion

     Limited progress has been made in the alignment of the veterinary, phytosanitary and food
     sectors. Neither the legislative framework nor the administrative structures are in place to
     allow full implementation of the acquis. The control systems remain weak. The main
     difficulties are in the veterinary sector, in particular as regards eradication and control of
     animal disease.

     4.13.    Chapter 13: Fisheries

     Turkey made no substantial progress on the alignment of its legislation with the acquis in
     fisheries. A new delay in modifying the Fisheries Law also affects announced implementing
     legislation and administrative changes.

     The administrative structures of the fisheries sector remain unsatisfactory due to limited
     capacity and the spread of competences between different ministries. The enforcement
     surveillance, inspection and control activities are entrusted to both Ministry of Agriculture
     and Rural Affairs (MARA) and the Coast Guard (under the Ministry of Internal Affairs). The
     Undersecretary of Maritime Affairs (Prime Ministry) deals with vessels registration. The
     planned reorganisation of MARA with a view to establishing a central Directorate General for
     Fishery Products has not taken place. Some reinforcement of the administrative capacity is
     taking place at local level with the construction of 30 fisheries port-offices for monitoring and
     recording of landings and recruitment of extra staff for these new port offices.

     There are no developments concerning resource and fleet management as well as
     inspection and control. Generally, Turkey has a lack of adequate scientific research on
     assessing the stocks and managing resources especially for the key targeted species.
     Implementation of the acquis is at an early stage.

     No progress has been recorded concerning structural actions. Implementation of the acquis
     has not started yet. On market policy, there is no market intervention system in line with the
     acquis. Five fisheries and aquaculture producer unions were set up which however only
     partially comply with the acquis on producers' organisations. With regards to state aid, no
     progress can be reported on related legislation in fisheries. Turkey has not concluded new
     international agreements.

     Conclusion

     Turkey made no progress concerning fisheries. Important gaps remain in its legislation as
     compared to the acquis and the administrative structures are not yet sufficient for the future
     implementation of the Common Fisheries Policy.

     4.14.    Chapter 14: Transport policy

     Progress can be reported in the field of road transport, notably in terms of legislative
     developments. The international fleet has been licensed mostly in line with acquis
     requirements. However, licensing of the national fleet is not complete. Significant differences
     between national and international transport persist. These mainly concern the criteria for
     professional competence and financial standing. Legislation on taxes and tolls requires further
     alignment. Social rules and their enforcement legislation need to be aligned with latest acquis.
     The implementation of the digital tachograph has not yet started in practice. The requirements



EN                                                  47                                                   EN
      on speed limitation devices are not applied to lighter buses and utility vehicles. No progress
     can be reported regarding privatised vehicle road worthiness stations, on which the Council of
     State ordered a stay of execution. Their number is very limited. Strengthening of the
     administrative capacity is required as well as improvement of the cooperation between all
     relevant authorities. Preparations in this area are advanced.

     There has been no progress on railway transport. Legislative alignment and administrative
     capacity are limited and there is no regulatory body in place. TCDD, the state railway
     company, has a monopoly and depends heavily on public subsidies. The infrastructure needs
     to be substantially modernised to ensure interoperability with the European rail network.
     Alignment with the acquis in this area is lagging behind, and shows major shortcomings
     concerning the required separation of essential functions, safety certification, management
     independence of the incumbent operator and the administrative and institutional set-up
     necessary to allow a rail market to emerge.

     There is no inland waterways transport as covered by the acquis in Turkey.

     Regarding air transport some progress can be reported. By law the General Directorate of
     Civil Aviation (GDCA) was granted financial and technical autonomy. Related restructuring
     and recruitments are outstanding. A GDCA branch was established in Istanbul, with another
     one foreseen in Antalya. Some implementing regulations have been issued. An autonomous
     accident investigation board, attached to the Minister, has been established. An instruction on
     slot allocation principles has been issued. Furthermore, a slot coordinator post, as well as
     evaluation and technical committees, was established. Alignment with the acquis in this field
     is underway. Turkey has not yet engaged with the Commission in negotiations on a
     “horizontal aviation agreement”, and does not accept Community designation, a fundamental
     requirement under Community law.

     In the area of maritime transport, good progress can be reported in legislative alignment and
     strengthening of administrative capacity, particularly in the field of safety. Regulations were
     issued on the safety of fishing vessels, investigation of marine incidents, monitoring and
     quality of seafarer’s training, safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers, marine equipment,
     and port state control. A marine accident investigation board was established with 49 staff.
     200 experts were recruited as flag state and port state inspectors.

     No progress can be reported on the procedures to become a signatory party to certain
     international conventions (SOLAS-78, SOLAS-88, Load Line 88 and Mar-Pol annexes III and
     IV). The detention rate of Turkish vessels in 2005 decreased to 7.5%. However, the country is
     still on the medium to high risk category of the black list of the Paris Memorandum of
     Understanding. As regards maritime security, no steps beyond launching studies have been
     taken in order to align to the legislation on enhancing port security. Regarding market access,
     the rules on both cabotage and ship registration are in conflict with the Community rules.
     Preparations for further improvement in this area are underway.

     No progress can be reported concerning the access to Turkish ports of Cyprus-flagged and/ or
     managed vessels, and of vessels whose last port of call was Cyprus. Neither was progress
     made on the lifting of restrictions applied to Cypriot aircraft which aim to use the Turkish
     national airspace, nor on the restrictions on communications between Turkish and Cypriot
     civil aviation authorities and air navigation service providers.




EN                                                 48                                                  EN
      No progress has taken place concerning state aid. There is no established institution or legal
     framework in Turkey to regulate state aid.

     Conclusion

     Some progress has been made. Legislative alignment is fairly advanced in the area of road
     transport, but uneven in the other sectors. Implementation and enforcement capacity require
     further attention. Decisions on the structure of the railway sector are outstanding. In the areas
     of maritime and air transport, the adoption of international agreements is not complemented
     by the transposition of the relevant acquis. Turkey has not removed all restrictions on free
     movement of goods, including restrictions on the means of transport.

     4.15.    Chapter 15: Energy

     Preparations are fairly advanced with regard to security of supply. Turkey's oil stocks,
     however, are not calculated according to EU methodology. The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil
     pipeline became operational.

     Some progress has been made as regards the internal energy market. The privatisation
     process of distribution assets has started for three regions. Implementing regulations were
     enacted on electricity demand forecasting, and cross-border electricity trade. The threshold for
     eligible consumers has been reduced to 6 GWh. A new amendment, however, allows cross-
     subsidies and vertical integration. High electricity losses, including theft, persisted. Two six-
     hour blackouts occurred in July affecting 13 cities, mainly due to generation capacity
     constraints. Unchanged electricity tariffs in the context of rising gas import prices may in the
     short term result in real capacity reductions. Turkey is not yet a member of the Union for the
     Coordination of Transmission of Energy. Turkey has not signed the Energy Community
     Treaty establishing a regional energy market in southeast Europe.

     Regarding the internal gas market, no new implementing legislation has been issued. Some
     liberalisation took place: in-city natural gas distribution tenders were undertaken for 54 cities.
     The market share of any importer or wholesaler is limited by law to 20%. The state-owned
     company BOTAS has not transferred existing contracts and maintains its monopolistic
     position. Overall alignment in these areas is well underway, however implementation is
     lagging behind.

     Concerning state aids to the coal industry, no progress can be reported. Alignment in this area
     is low.

     No progress can be reported on energy efficiency. Turkey does not have a framework law for
     its promotion. Some progress has been made on renewable energy sources. However, Turkey
     has not set itself an ambitious target yet for their increase. An implementing regulation on the
     guarantee of origin has been issued. Turkey is partially aligned in this area.

     Regarding nuclear energy, Turkey's capacity to fulfil acquis requirements is fairly advanced.
     Turkey has no nuclear power generation plants yet, but has announced plans to promote the
     construction of a capacity of 5000 MW by 2020. The independence of the Turkish Atomic
     Energy Authority (TAEK) needs attention. Supervisory responsibilities are not separated from
     research and the promotion of nuclear energy. Turkey has reached a considerable degree of
     alignment as regards nuclear safety and radiation protection. No new implementing
     regulation has been enacted. Substantial upgrading of existing facilities will be needed,



EN                                                  49                                                    EN
      including radioactive waste management and storage facilities. Turkey has not acceded to the
     Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive
     Waste Management, to which Euratom became a contracting party in January 2006.

     Conclusion

     Some progress has been achieved in the field of energy. Overall, alignment is uneven. A
     framework law for energy efficiency remains to be developed. Administrative capacity and
     the independence of regulatory bodiesneed strengthening.

     4.16.   Chapter 16: Taxation

     In the area of indirect taxation, there has been very limited progress. Turkey has partially
     aligned its legislation. Concerning VAT discrepancies from the acquis are of a structural
     nature and include, amongst others, exemptions, special schemes, and the application of
     reduced rates. By introducing a reduced rate of 8% for textile products, Turkey moved further
     away from the acquis.

     On excise duties, no progress can be reported. A new tax law eliminated the specific duty on
     tobacco products by determining only ad valorem rates and minimum excise levels. This
     structure is not in line with the acquis. Moreover, the law did not eliminate levying a duty on
     imported tobacco and cigarettes. This discriminatory practice is not in line with the acquis and
     represents a breach under the Customs Union and WTO rules. Turkey has not yet introduced a
     duty-suspension regime for domestic movements and fiscal warehouses.

     With regard to alcoholic beverages, Turkey applies an ad valorem duty, supplemented by a
     specific one when lower than a certain amount. Again, this system is not in line with the
     acquis since it uses differentiated duty based on the type of product, instead of the alcoholic
     content. The result is higher rates for imported products than for comparable domestic ones.
     Turkey has lowered the leeway at which the Council of Ministers can increase tax rates, thus
     ensuring a higher predictability of future rates.

     In direct taxation there is limited progress. The Corporate Tax Law was slightly aligned to
     addresses issues such as split-off and split-up. Turkey needs to avoid introducing measures
     that would be against the principles of the code of conduct for business taxation. Overall,
     alignment remains limited.

     In the area of administrative cooperation and mutual assistance, little progress is noted.

     The new Revenue Administration became operational, a semi-autonomous institution attached
     to the Ministry of Finance. The intention is to reduce hierarchical layers and improve
     accountability of the local tax offices to headquarters. In addition, policy making at the
     ministry of Finance passed to a newly created directorate general for tax policy. The impact
     cannot be assessed yet.

     Computerisation of tax offices and the distribution of tax identification numbers to taxpayers
     continued. So far, 41 million taxpayers have received tax identification numbers; almost 75%
     of the tax returns were filed electronically. Planning of further alignment within the
     framework of a time-bound and result-oriented tax strategy, including the preparation of IT
     for interconnection with the Community systems, is at an early stage.

     Conclusion


EN                                                 50                                                   EN
      Limited progress has been made. The Turkish fiscal regime is partially in line with the acquis.
     Alignment is incomplete, particularly as regards the scope and rates of VAT, the structure and
     rates of excise duties, as well as direct taxation in general. All discriminatory elements on the
     taxation of alcoholic and tobacco products have to be abolished urgently.

     4.17.    Chapter 17: Economic and Monetary Union

     In the area of monetary policy, Turkey made limited progress. It adopted new legislation that
     prohibits certain privileged access of public sector authorities to financial institutions. Turkey
     will need to continue to implement the necessary changes to its institutional and legal
     framework. In particular, the Central Bank (CBT) has not adopted a secondary objective that
     allows for general economic objectives of the European Community to take precedence over
     domestic objectives. In addition, it has not yet adopted the relevant rules and structures related
     to the integration of the CBT into the European System of Central Banks by the time of EU-
     accession. Some progress can be reported as regards central bank independence and the
     prohibition of public sector financing, and prohibition of privileged access of the public sector
     to financial institutions.The CBT changed its profit and loss calculation method related to
     foreign exchange purchase and sale transactions to “average cost method”, in accordance with
     the “Guideline of the European Central Bank on the Legal Framework for Accounting and
     Financial Reporting in the European System of Central Banks” Banks are no longer required
     to keep a certain amount of compulsory reserves in the form of Turkish Treasury bonds.
     However, the Investor Protection Fund, a guarantee system for investments in securities, is
     obliged to invest its assets in government bonds or deposits, which in addition must be kept at
     state owned banks. Finally, all public institutions, excluding the central Government, must
     deposit their funds either in state banks or buy government securities. Overall, in the area of
     monetary policy Turkey is advanced.

     Certain progress can be reported concerning economic policy. The establishment of a
     Revenue Administration and the adoption of the Public Financial Management and Control
     Law contribute to enhancing the administrative capacity in the area of fiscal policy. However,
     several ministries and under-secretariats have varying degrees of responsibilities on main
     interrelated economic activity areas. Such fragmentation of responsibilities reduces the
     efficiency and effectiveness of economic policy formulation at all stages, in particular as
     regards decision making, co-ordination, and implementation. Partly due to this situation major
     economic decisions are taken on an ad hoc basis and the economic impact of key legislation is
     only partially assessed.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made progress on the field of economic and monetary union. However, the
     independence of the central bank is not complete and legislation to prevent monetary
     financing of the public sector, as well as the prohibition of privileged access of public
     authorities to financial institutions is not aligned with the acquis. The absence of economic
     impact assessments and of efficient coordination and cooperation reduce the effectiveness of
     economic policy.

     4.18.    Chapter 18: Statistics

     With regards to statistical infrastructure, Turkey made considerable progress in transposing
     the acquis with the adoption of a new statistical law. The law strengthens the coordinating
     role of the Turkish Statistical Institute (Turkstat). Establishing its enhanced role in practice is


EN                                                   51                                                    EN
      at an early stage. The administrative capacity needs further strengthening. To cope with the
     acquis, serious attention needs to be given to streamlining the decision making process.
     Training staff on methodological and operational changes remains necessary.

     In the field of classifications notable progress was achieved. The Institute's classifications,
     following the European practice, are now available on a server and are more widely used.
     Several classifications, such as for economic activities, products by activity, construction,
     occupations, and education, have been translated and implemented. The use of these
     classifications by other government bodies is increasing.

     As regards the availability of sector statistics, progress was made in a number of areas. In
     demographic and social statistics, the legal act to establish a population registrations system
     based on the place of residence was adopted. An income and living conditions survey (EU-
     SILC) has been conducted. As regards business statistics, structural business statistics (SBS)
     surveys have been introduced. In the area of household budget surveys, the monthly survey
     has continued. In the area of purchasing power parities, several studies were conducted in
     line with EU standards. Concerning external trade statistics and the harmonised indices of
     consumer prices (HICP) a high degree of compliance has been reached and data are sent to
     Eurostat. In agricultural statistics, work on setting up a farm register is continuing. Finally,
     public accessibility to statistical information improved.

     Development regarding the business register, and statistics on business, public finance, and
     agriculture, as well as the national accounts, is at an early stage. Challenge of the latter is a
     major revision and re-benchmarking while moving to ESA 95.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made some progress as regards the usage of classifications and the availability of
     sector statistics. The new statistical law constitutes an important step towards harmonisation.
     However, overall alignment is not completed.

     4.19.    Chapter 19: Employment and Social Policy

     No progress can be reported in the area of labour law. Shortcomings in the transposition of
     some directives remain. These include the limited scope of application of the Labour Law. On
     administrative capacity, some additional qualified personnel were recruited to the Ministry of
     Labour and Social Security.

     Turkey needs to continue efforts to reduce child labour with the support of the International
     Labour Organisation (ILO).

     In the field of health and safety at work, Turkey has reached a good degree of alignment
     with the acquis, but outstanding shortcomings reported last year remain. In particular, the
     regulation transposing the Framework Directive is still suspended, although other regulations
     in this area remain in force. Legislation does not cover all workers in the private sector nor the
     public sector. The National Occupational Health and Safety Council, an advisory body
     composed of public institutions, social partners and relevant stakeholders, has adopted a
     national policy in the field of health and safety at work. Activities relating to the enforcement
     and implementation of health and safety at work legislation have been undertaken throughout
     the reporting period. However, further efforts in this respect are needed, including through




EN                                                  52                                                    EN
      awareness-raising, training and strengthening the capacity of the inspection bodies (both
     labour and social security inspection).

     As regards social dialogue, no progress can be reported on the pending draft laws aimed at
     bringing the currently applicable Trade Union and Collective Bargaining, Strike and Lockout
     Laws in line with ILO and EU standards. Full trade union rights remain to be established in
     Turkey. Social dialogue is weak; the performance of the Economic and Social Council needs
     improvement (see also Section Economic and social rights).

     As regards employment policy, little progress can be reported. Low labour force participation
     and employment rates, in particular of women, high levels of youth unemployment, the large
     size of the informal economy and the strong rural/urban labour market divide remain the main
     challenges. The overall employment rate in 2005 decreased to 43.4%, whereas unemployment
     rate remained at 10.3%. The scale of unregistered employment continues to be of concern. It
     constitutes 50.1% of overall employment, and 88.2% of employment in the agriculture sector.
     The Turkish employment agency (IŞKUR) continued efforts to improve its institutional
     capacity. Progress was made in preparing the Joint Assessment Paper of Employment Policy
     Priorities (JAP) between the European Commission and the Turkish authorities.

     In the field of European Social Fund, legal alignment has been limited. Administrative
     structures and legislation will need to be adapted in order to create the adequate institutional
     capacity for the future management, implementation, monitoring, audit and control of ESF-
     type measures at national and, where appropriate, regional and local levels. In this respect,
     Turkey will have first to adapt its structure and legislation for the implementation of the
     component on Human Resources Development of the Instrument for Pre-accession (IPA).

     Concerning social inclusion, work under the Joint Inclusion Memorandum (JIM) process has
     continued. However, there is no progress on a national integrated strategy. According to the
     results of a poverty study conducted by TURKSTAT, 1.29% of the population live below the
     hunger line, while 25.6% live below the poverty line. The percentage of the latter increased to
     40% in the rural areas. According to the same study, the child poverty rate (below 6 years of
     age) is 34%, while this rate reaches almost 40% in rural areas. There has been no progress on
     upgrading and increasing co-ordination of the administrative structures.

     An action plan for employment of people with disabilities has been prepared, and several
     implementing regulations were issued related to the Law on People with Disabilities. These
     cover areas such as workplaces and educational services for disabled people.

     In the field of social protection, Parliament adopted legislation on social security reform in
     May and June 2006, providing for a complete overhaul of the Turkish social security system.
     This will be simplified and bureaucracy reduced, benefits-liabilities will be equal for
     everybody, free healthcare will be provided to all children under 18. The reform aims to
     ensure the long-term financial stability of the social security system and to regulate assistance
     to the poorest. Upgrading of the administrative capacity of the newly established Social
     Security Institution is ongoing. The inspection capacity of the social security system requires
     strengthening.

     No developments can be reported in the field of anti-discrimination. Transposition of the EC
     directives concerning discrimination on grounds of racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief,
     disability, age and sexual orientation is incomplete. In particular transposition of the non-
     employment aspects of the Racial Equality Directive needs to be addressed. An effective and



EN                                                  53                                                   EN
      independent "Equality Body" needs to be established to promote non-discrimination and equal
     treatment. Significant challenges remain with regard to the situation of minorities (see also
     Section– Human rights and the protection of minorities).

     As regards equal opportunities, further alignment is required in particular concerning
     parental leave, equal pay, equal access to employment, burden of proof, as well as statutory
     and occupational social security. Furthermore, the Equality Body required by the acquis
     remains to be established. Participation of women in the labour force is at a very low level
     (under 25%), and the female employment rate has dropped to around 20%. (see also Section
     Economic and social rights). The administrative capacity of the Directorate General for the
     Status of Women needs to be strengthened.

     Conclusion

     Turkey has made limited progress on alignment with the acquis. Some progress can be
     reported on social protection and on the implementation of the new Law on People with
     Disabilities. Further efforts are needed to complete the JAP and JIM documents. Particular
     attention should be paid to ensuring respect of full trade union rights, as well as to tackling
     undeclared work. Combating unregistered employment requires attention. The administrative
     capacity needs to be improved to ensure an effective implementation in most areas.

     4.20.   Chapter 20: Enterprise and Industrial Policy

     Turkey has made some progress with regard to enterprise and industrial policy principles.
     With policy documents such as the 9th Development Plan (2007-20013), the medium-term
     programme (2006-2008) and the annual programme (2006), Turkey largely follows EU
     enterprise and industrial policy principles.

     The Investment Advisory Council (IAC), composed of chief executive officers (CEOs) from
     important foreign investors and from industry associations, chaired by the Prime Minister,
     made a number of policy recommendations. The Treasury established an investment portal to
     provide information for international investors. Net foreign direct investment inflows into
     Turkey more than doubled in 2005, and reached € 7.8 billion. The Law establishing an
     Investment Support and Promotion Agency has entered into force. The Agency will be
     established in Ankara and be attached to Prime Ministry with administrative and financial
     independence. The time required to establish a company was shortened to one day. However,
     further improvement is necessary regarding the business environment, in particular as regards
     reducing "red tape". Corporate governance principles are not fully implemented.

     Turkey has a SME strategy in line with the European Charter for Small Enterprises. A
     common SME definition for all Turkish institutions was introduced. It is in line with the
     acquis, except for lower limits on turnover and asset size. Application procedures have been
     simplified.

     A Supreme Council for Science and research has been established and a National Strategy for
     Science and Research (2005-2010) adopted (see also Chapter 25 – Science and Research).
     The credit guarantee schemes for tradesmen and craftsmen, as well as micro-finance have not
     produced concrete results yet. State banks provide subsidised loans to SMEs.

     In the area of enterprise and industrial policy instruments Turkey has made good progress.
     It has taken part in the Multi-Annual programme for SMEs (MAP), establishing 9 Euro-info-



EN                                                 54                                                  EN
      centres, setting up a credit guarantee fund and participating in 22 BEST projects. Turkey also
     participated in the LIFE, the e-CONTENT, and will participate in the e-TEN programmes.
     Financial incentive schemes are implemented for enterprises, notably through loan and credit
     schemes as well as a credit guarantee fund run by KOSGEB.

     Turkey’s current legislation (including the 'Law on Obligations', the 'Commercial Code', the
     'Law on Legal Interest and Default Interest' and the 'Enforcement and Bankruptcy Law')
     contains provisions in conformity with the EP and Council Directive 2000/35/EC on
     combating late payment in commercial transactions. However, there are gaps, as well as a
     lack of clarity, in particular with regard to the scope, definitions and the payment period.
     Preparations in this area are well on track.

     Some progress was made with respect to sector policies. Turkey has introduced sector-
     specific priorities in its recent key planning and programming documents (see enterprise and
     industrial policy principles). In certain areas laws have been adopted to establish a sector-
     specific policy framework and relevant consultation mechanisms. However, no sector-specific
     strategies exist. While in 2004 privatisation receipts amounted to € 1 billion, they exceeded
     € 10 billion in 2005. Regarding tenders, public disclosure requirements have not always been
     fulfilled appropriately. On 31 August 2006, Turkey presented to the Commission a National
     Restructuring Programme for the Turkish steel industry. This Programme is being analysed by
     the Commission services (see also Chapter 8 – Competition policy).

     Preparations in this area are moderately advanced. Turkey has a satisfactory capacity to
     formulate adequate sector policy measures. However, its capacity to assess competitiveness
     and the impact of policy measures needs to be improved.

     Conclusion

     Overall Turkey's has made good progress in this chapter, notably with regard to legal steps for
     establishment of an Investment Support and Promotion Agency, as well as privatisation,
     alignment of the SME definition with the acquis and policy programming. The country has
     achieved a reasonable alignment to the acquis in this chapter.

     4.21.   Chapter 21: Trans European Networks

     Some limited progress has been made regarding Trans European Networks. On transport
     networks, a transport infrastructure needs assessment (TINA) study has not yet been
     completed. Turkey needs to supply reliable and high quality traffic forecasts, which will be
     essential for defining a possible transport network having the same characteristics as the TEN-
     T. There is a shortage of classified transport data. Turkey participated in the High Level
     Group on the extension of the major trans-European transport axes to neighbouring countries,
     and is expected to implement the Group's recommendations.

     Under the energy networks programme, the Community supports transmission infrastructure
     feasibility projects to increase competitiveness in the EU electricity and gas markets while
     reinforcing security of supply. The construction of the Turkey-Greece gas interconnector is
     delayed. The Nabucco natural gas pipeline project from the Caspian and Central Asian region
     to Europe via Turkey is among the priority projects of the EU, and Turkey should pursue
     efforts to support this project.

     Conclusion



EN                                                 55                                                  EN
      Limited progress has been made, and Turkey's alignment in this area is at a relatively early
     stage.

     4.22.    Chapter 22: Regional Policy and Coordination of Structural Instruments

     No particular progress can be noted in respect of territorial organisation. In view of the
     requirements of the regulation on territorial units for statistics (NUTS) and for an effective
     implementation of regional policy, the current provisional classification for statistical regions
     (corresponding to NUTS level II) may require further improvement. In parallel with the
     NUTS II organisation, most institutions in Turkey continue to use the traditional geographical
     regions as the main reference. Progress has taken place in the field of regional statistics.
     Preparations in this area are moderately advanced.

     There was some progress in the development of the legislative framework. The Law on the
     Establishment, Coordination and Duties of Development Agencies” (DAs) was ratified and
     came into force in February 2006. This includes principles and procedures related to the
     establishment, duties, and coordination of development agencies, as well as their employment
     policy, budget and audit procedures. Implementing legislation needs to be adopted for the
     establishment of individual agencies.

     The Law establishes that the State Planning Organisation (SPO) will be responsible for the
     coordination of DAs at national level. The aim is to set up an agency in each of the 26 NUTS
     II regions, but their establishment, by government decree, will be staggered over a period of
     several years. Their main purpose is to accelerate regional development, promote cooperation
     between the public and private sectors and contribute to the reduction of inter-regional
     disparities. The DAs will be funded in part from transfers from the national budget and in part
     by the special provincial administrations (local authorities) and municipalities. The DAs will
     also be expected to generate operating revenues, although this is not realistic in the poorer
     regions. The role and functions of the DA's raise some concern.

     The legislative framework for financial control and compliance with other Community
     policies is addressed in other chapters. Preparations in this area are at an early stage.

     There has been no major change in the institutional framework. The main progress
     consisted of strengthening collaboration between sectoral and regional departments of the
     SPO. Two development agencies were established in the regions of Adana and İzmir.
     However, there are as yet no structures, such as an inter-ministerial coordination body, for
     coordination with other line ministries and interaction with these in relation to regional
     development has generally been confined to consultation on documents in an advanced stage
     of preparation rather than involvement from inception. Managing Authorities for the
     implementation of the regional development component of IPA have not yet been established
     in the relevant line ministries. It is foreseen to mandate the Central Finance and Contracts
     Unit (CFCU), the only body currently accredited for the implementation of pre-accession
     assistance to Turkey, for these tasks during a transition period. Preparations in this area are at
     an early stage.

     Limited progress can be noted with regard to the administrative capacity. The CFCU has
     been recruiting staff vigorously and, to ensure sustainability, these recruitments must now be
     supported by secondments from the line ministries that will host the future Managing
     Authorities. Within the SPO, administrative capacity is adequate in terms of staff, but
     decision making is still concentrated in the hands of a small number of officials. There has



EN                                                  56                                                    EN
      been very limited devolution of responsibility towards technical ministries and regional
     structures. The new DAs should, within the next few years, provide the necessary
     administrative capacity at regional level, taking over from Service Unions that have been
     established in all regions in which EU supported regional development programmes have
     been initiated. Preparations in this area are at an early stage.

     Some progress can be reported with regard to programming. The 9th seven (formerly five)
     year development plan was published by the SPO in early 2006 and reflects the increasing
     importance attached to the regional perspective in the developmental context. The SPO and
     line ministries are engaged in the preparation of programming documents, namely the
     Strategic Coherence Framework and Operational Programmes.

     Programming under IPA will be more focused as, under the regional component, it has been
     agreed with the Commission services that a maximum of three Operational Programmes will
     be presented, covering the themes of environment, transport and regional competitiveness.
     Although the State Planning Organisation has extensive planning experience, significant
     weaknesses remain in bridging the divide between strategic plans and operational
     programmes. Preparations in this area are moderately advanced.

     Good progress can be noted with regard to monitoring and evaluation. After creating a
     department for monitoring and evaluation in 2004, the SPO adopted a monitoring and
     evaluation framework in 2006, determining the responsibilities of the actors in the process. A
     monitoring manual has been drafted and a common web-based Monitoring Information
     System (MIS) has been designed and put into use. Preparations in this area are starting.

     For developments on financial management and control see Chapter 32.

     Conclusion

     Progress has been made in adapting the legal framework and in the definition of regional
     structures for the implementation of regional policy. However, the role and functioning of
     these agencies require attention. Ownership and accountability need improvement, including
     considering repartition of competences between ministries at both central and regional level.
     Preparation of programming documents for the implementation of IPA should be accelerated.
     Overall, Turkey's alignment with the acquis in this chapter is modest

     4.23.   Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights

     With regard to the independence of the judiciary, various provisions of the Turkish
     Constitution and of domestic law guarantee this principle. However, a number of factors are
     perceived as undermining it. Judges and public prosecutors are attached to the Ministry of
     Justice as far as their administrative functions are concerned. The High Council of Judges and
     Prosecutors, the supreme governing body of the judiciary, does not have its own secretariat
     and budget. Its premises are still inside the Ministry of Justice building. The judicial
     inspectors, who are responsible for evaluating the performance of judges and prosecutors, are
     attached to the Ministry rather than to the High Council. The Minister and the Undersecretary
     of the Ministry of Justice are two of the seven members of the Council with voting rights. The
     remaining five are appointed among judges of the Court of Cassation and the Council of
     State. This composition does not seem to be representative of the judiciary as a whole and,
     together with the other issues listed above, may create the potential for the executive to
     influence decisions relating to the careers of judges in Turkey, provided that the executive is



EN                                                 57                                                  EN
      present16. The judicial inspectors, who are responsible for evaluating the performance of
     judges and prosecutors, are attached to the Ministry rather than to the High Council.

     On 26 June 2006, 501 judges and prosecutors established an association called the “Union of
     Judges and Prosecutors” (YARSAV). The founding members of YARSAV are mostly from
     the Court of Cassation, the Council of State and judges and prosecutors from Ankara and
     Istanbul. YARSAV's main objectives are to safeguard judicial independence, impartiality and
     security of tenure as well as professional rules and ethics.

     Judges and prosecutors can now access their appraisal files.

     Some progress has been achieved with regard to the impartiality of the judiciary. Changes
     introduced to the Law on Judges and Prosecutors in December 2005 provide that judges and
     public prosecutors who leave the profession to become candidates in general or local elections
     shall not be allowed to return to their profession should they fail to be elected.

     Following a decision by the Ministry of Justice, candidate judges and prosecutors now fall
     under the scope of the Law on the Ethical Board for Public Servants. The Bangalore
     Principles of Judicial Conduct being part of the curriculum of the Justice Academy, a four-
     hour judicial ethics seminar is provided to all candidate judges and prosecutors.

     According to Decision No 424 dated 10 October 2006, the High Council of Judges and
     Prosecutors recognised the Budapest Principles adopted by the Conference of Prosecutors
     General of Europe, which it will disseminate to all judicial branches.

     Further to the adoption in June 2006 of a law on the payment of judges and prosecutors,
     salaries were increased by approximately 40%. In particular, the salaries of the Presidents of
     the high courts were raised, in line with requests by the judiciary, to the level of that of the
     Under-secretary of the Prime Ministry.

     In relation to the professionalism and competence of the judiciary, the Ministry of Justice
     and the Justice Academy continued to provide extensive training on the new Penal Code and
     the Code of Criminal Procedure, on prevention of torture and ill-treatment, freedom of
     expression and effectiveness of the judicial process. Training continued to be provided on
     foreign languages and on EU and Human Rights law. In this respect, opportunities were given
     to a number of judges and prosecutors to benefit from periods of training abroad. However,
     the Judicial Academy should further develop into a strong and independent training provider
     for the entire magistracy, including at regional level.

     Continued progress can be reported on the efficiency of the judiciary. As regards
     implementing measures, in January 2006 the Ministry of Justice updated all existing circulars
     through the issuing of some 100 new ones mainly targeting public prosecutors. The move
     aimed at creating a clearer and more concise framework for the implementation in particular
     of the New Code of Criminal Procedure and the Law on the Enforcement of Sentences.

     A law allowing for practicing lawyers to become judges or prosecutors was rejected. The
     4 000 available posts will therefore be filled through the standard recruitment procedures. In


     16
            Despite being the Chairman of the HCJP, the Minister of Justice rarely attends its meetings. The
            number of meetings presided by the Minister of Justice in the last six years are as follows: 9 in 2001, 11
            in 2002, 12 in 2003, 8 in 2004, 4 in 2005 and 2 (as of 26.9.2006) in 2006.



EN                                                        58                                                             EN
      this respect, the pre-service training has been temporarily shortened from two to one year.
     Attention would need to be paid to taking away administrative functions from magistrates by
     attributing these to sufficiently trained court staff. The budget of the Ministry of Justice was
     substantially increased and currently represents over 1% of the overall state budget. As far as
     computerisation is concerned, the National Judicial Network Project continued to progress
     and became operational in more courts and prisons. The major court houses and all judges and
     prosecutors now dispose of laptops and Internet access. Trials will be run on the National
     Judicial Network and case-law will also be available on line. The network will connect
     electronically the judiciary with all government institutions. Since the entering into force of
     the new Code of Criminal Procedure, prosecutors have started to use greater discretion to
     discontinue unmeritorious cases, while many cases are reported where judges returned
     indictments which were not based on sufficient evidence.

     The system of plea bargaining was recently introduced by the new Code of Criminal
     Procedure. A commission has been set up by the Ministry of Justice in an attempt to improve
     the system.

     Progress can be reported in the area of the judicial reform.

     Overall some progress can be reported on the fight against corruption. The Law on Access to
     Information was amended in 2006 to enable citizens to dispute all decisions of state agencies
     regarding denials of requests for information. Public organisations are making use of the new
     legislation. According to official statistics, a total of 626 789 requests for information were
     submitted and public agencies responded positively to 86,5% of requests. The UN Convention
     on Fight against Corruption was adopted by Parliament and entered into force in May 2006.

     There is still no overall strategy and action plan to prevent and fight corruption.

     However, corruption continues to be a widespread problem in Turkey. The efficiency and
     effectiveness of the various governmental, parliamentary and other bodies established to
     combat corruption remains weak and the degree of co-ordination and co-operation amongst
     these structures is inadequate. Interaction between the public sector, private sector and civil
     society needs to be improved. Stronger action is required to raise public awareness of
     corruption as a serious criminal offence. Continuous support at the highest political level for
     the fight against corruption needs to be ensured.

     The Ethical Board for Public Servants established in 2004 is not operating efficiently due to
     the lack of human and financial resources. The Board needs to be strengthened in order to be
     able to carry out its tasks of monitoring respect of ethical principles and investigating
     complaints.

     The Law on Public Financial Management and Control (PFMC), adopted in 2003, is not
     implemented properly, in particular as regards internal audit and performance measures.
     Another area that needs to be addressed is the lack of audit power of the Turkish Court of
     Auditors on military expenditures (See Chapter 28 - Financial Control for further details).

     Despite the fact that the application of parliamentary immunity has been identified as a
     significant problem in the context of corruption in Turkish public life, no development can be
     reported in this area. Also, no progress can be reported either on financing of political parties.




EN                                                  59                                                    EN
      As regards fundamental rights, legislative progress is limited. However, implementation of
     reforms continued. The adoption of the law for the establishment of an Ombudsman is a
     welcome development, in so far as this new institution is expected to contribute to the
     transparency and accountability of public sector activities.

     There were no developments as regards the institutions in charge of monitoring and
     promoting human rights, such as the Human Rights Presidency.

     With respect to the right to life and, in particular, the abolition of the death penalty, Turkey
     ratified, in March 2006, the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
     and Political Rights (ICCPR), which aims to abolish the death penalty. Protocol 13 to the
     ECHR, which abolishes the death penalty at all times, was ratified in February 2006. Turkey
     abolished the death penalty in its national legislation, in all circumstances, in 2004.

     As regards torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the implementation of
     the legislative framework has continued. Reports of torture and ill-treatment have diminished
     compared to the previous year. However, cases are still reported outside detention centres.
     Further, human rights violations in the Southeast and the problem of impunity remain of
     concern. The First Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, signed in 2004, and the Optional Protocol
     to the UN Convention against Torture (OPCAT), signed in September 2005, still await
     ratification.

     As regards protection of personal data, there have been no developments.

     As regards freedom of thought, conscience and religion, the freedom of worship is generally
     respected. However, there was no progress in addressing the problems encountered by
     non-Muslim religious communities, some of which are not officially recognised, and by the
     large Muslim Alevi community which is also not recognised. There was no progress in
     relation to the right of conscientious objection to military service, which Turkey still does not
     recognise.

     In general, open debate has increased in Turkish society. However, certain provisions of the
     new Penal Code leave a significant margin of interpretation for the judiciary. In particular, the
     restrictive interpretation of Article 301 led to prosecutions and convictions of people for the
     expression of non-violent opinion.

     Regarding the freedom of assembly and association, the trend of diminishing restrictions on
     civil society has continued. However, there have been reports that security forces have made
     excessive use of force during demonstrations. Furthermore, there are still some obstacles as
     regards the establishment of associations representing particular religious or cultural interests.

     On right to education, efforts need to be continued in order to improve further the social
     perception and role of women in society; also, the participation of girls in the education
     system, in particular in the Southeast.

     As regards right to property, there were no developments to improve the situation of non-
     Muslim communities. There were no developments on the in relation to problems encountered
     by Greek nationals and Syriacs in inheriting and registering property.




EN                                                  60                                                    EN
      No legislative developments can be reported in the field of anti-discrimination (see also
     Chapter 19 for the employment aspects). Protocol No 12 to the ECHR on the general
     prohibition of discrimination by public authorities, signed in 2001, still awaits ratification.

     Issue related to gender equality and women's rights receive growing public attention in
     Turkey. The legal framework is broadly satisfactory. However, in practice women's rights are
     not always protected, in particular in the poorest areas of the country. 'Honour crimes' need to
     be investigated more systematically and where appropriate followed-up with prosecution and
     convictions.

     There has been little change in the situation as regards the rights of the child. The
     implementation of legal provisions on education and employment under the age of fifteen
     needs to be improved.

     As regards the right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial, the average criminal trial period
     increased from 210 days in 2004 to 234 days in 2005, and so did the average duration of civil
     proceedings, from 177 days in 2004 to 184 days in 2005. The pending cases before the
     criminal courts remained stable: 1 050 754 criminal cases were carried over from 2004 to
     2005, while 1 050 250 criminal cases were carried over from 2005 to 2006.

     The pending cases before the civil courts slightly increased: 757 560 cases were carried over
     from 2005 to 2006, compared to 717 960 cases carried over from 2004 to 2005.

     Detainees enjoy the right to legal aid and statements made in the absence of lawyers are not
     admissible as evidence in court under the new Code of Criminal Procedure. However,
     restrictions have been introduced through the new anti-terror law with regard to access to
     legal aid: access to a lawyer may be denied during the first 24 hours of detention. Concerns
     remain, also, with regard to the lack of review of past cases, where statements were originally
     made without the presence of legal counsel and where defendants alleged that their testimony
     had been extracted through torture.

     With regard to the right of defence, a considerable increase was registered in the appointment
     of lawyers for free legal aid since the entry into force of the new Code of Criminal Procedure.
     However, the state fees to lawyers are low. This raises concerns on the quality of legal aid
     provided. In addition, the Union of Bars and the Ministry of Justice agreed on introducing
     legislative amendments to limit the scope of legal aid. This would reduce the number of
     suspects and detainees automatically qualifying for legal aid.

     Following the strengthened provisions in the new Code of Criminal Procedure regarding
     interpreters free of charge for legal interpretation between Turkish and languages used by
     non-Turkish speaking citizens, courts are now required to establish lists of expert witnesses,
     including interpreters.

     Difficulties are reported in the implementation of the principle of cross-examination. Efforts
     are required to provide specific training to both lawyers and judges and to allocate sufficient
     time to hearings. The capacity to handle the workload of the courts is stretched.

     Turkey's approach towards minority rights has remained unchanged. There was no progress to
     further align Turkish practices with international and EU standards.

     As regards EU citizens’ rights there have been no developments.



EN                                                  61                                                    EN
      Conclusion

     As regards the judiciary, progress has continued in the implementation of the legislation
     adopted previously. However, there remain challenges to ensure that the judicial system
     function in an independent, impartial and effective manner. Concerns remain regarding the
     perception of the independence of the judiciary, in particular the influence exerted by state
     bodies. Efforts are also needed to ensure equality of arms between prosecution and defence
     before courts.

     There has been some progress in the fight against corruption, notably on increasing
     transparency in the public administration. However, corruption remains widespread and anti-
     corruption authorities and policies are still weak. The scope of parliamentary immunity needs
     to be restricted as a matter of priority and the financing of political parties has to be dealt
     with.

     As regards fundamental rights, limited legislative progress was made, while implementation
     of reforms of previous years continued. Turkey needs to significantly improve the situation of
     fundamental rights in a number of areas and address the problems that minorities are facing.

     4.24.   Chapter 24: Justice, Freedom and Security

     As regards the external borders and Schengen some progress has been made. A National
     Action Plan towards the implementation of Turkey’s Integrated Border Management Strategy
     was adopted in March 2006. The plan represents a step forward towards alignment with EU
     standards, as the development of an integrated approach to border management is a key
     element for accession negotiations in this chapter.

     However, a number of serious shortcomings remain.

     At present, the land forces, the police, and the gendarmerie as well as the coast guard are each
     responsible for parts of the borders. In addition, the Customs Administration, under the
     authority of the Prime Ministry, is responsible for checks on goods and persons. Overall,
     inter-agency cooperation is at a very early stage and information exchange between the
     various authorities as well as delimitation of responsibilities remains subject to substantial
     improvements.

     Training and professionalism of border staff need to be enhanced, in particular in view of the
     deployment of conscripts. Risk analysis capacity needs to be further developed as a matter of
     priority. Procedures for checking vehicles and goods need to be reviewed. Infrastructure at
     some border crossing points needs considerable upgrading. Second line equipment is missing
     or underdeveloped, as well as first line document checking equipment. Surveillance
     equipment at border crossing points and along the green borders needs to be better adapted to
     Turkey's specific circumstances.

     As concerns visa policy, limited progress can be reported. With regard to alignment with the
     positive visa list, visa exemption agreements with Venezuela and Paraguay entered into force;
     one was signed with Colombia and visa-free regime for Andorra was introduced. No progress
     on alignment with the negative list can be reported.

     Although harmonisation with the uniform EU visa sticker has started, at present, Turkey
     allows nationals of 35 countries to apply for a visa at the borders, including citizens of 17



EN                                                 62                                                   EN
      Member States. This practice needs to be progressively replaced and visas should be issued by
     diplomatic/consular authorities. As far as the capacity of Turkish consulates is concerned,
     equipment to detect false documents has been distributed, but further training is needed.
     Alignment with the EU security features and standards for visas requires urgent attention.

     With regard to migration, only limited progress has been made. The National Action Plan on
     Asylum and Migration is being implemented. However, it does not provide details on
     deadlines for transposition of the acquis or improve administrative capacity, in particular
     setting up a specialised body.

     Negotiations to conclude a readmission agreement with the EC continued at a slow pace. For
     a timely and successful conclusion of the negotiations, Turkey's efforts need to be
     considerably increased.

     With regard to apprehension of illegal migrants, in 2005, 57 428 illegal migrants were
     apprehended in Turkey compared to 61 228 in 2004, where in the first six months of 2006,
     18 441 were apprehended.

     Considerable efforts are still required to align with the acquis and to strengthen the required
     administrative capacity for implementation.

     Some progress has been achieved in the area of asylum, with the introduction of amendments
     to the main legislation. The 10-days time limit for lodging an asylum claim was lifted. The
     possibility to empower selected Governorates to decide on asylum application was
     introduced, whereas before only the Ministry of Interior held this authority.

     However, no ad hoc forum was set up gathering all relevant stakeholders for an effective
     implementation of the Action Plan on Migration and Asylum and to clarify the future
     institutional structures. In order to ensure that all asylum seekers have access to a fair
     procedure and to ensure uniform implementation, new legislation is required, in particular, on
     procedures at international airports.

     The capacity at the reception centres for asylum seekers needs increasing and facilities need
     upgrading. Institutional responsibility for the management of these centres is not clear.

     The full implementation of the 1951 Geneva Convention and its 1967 Protocol is under
     preparation, with the intention to lift the geographic limitation by 2012.

     Preparations for alignment and the required administrative capacity is at a very early stage.

     Some progress has been registered in the field of police co-operation and limited progress
     was achieved in the fight against organised crime.

     Turkey is a party to all main international conventions on police co-operation. International
     police co-operation and co-operation with the EU Member States is mostly good. However, it
     is hampered by the lack of data protection legislation. Forensic capacity is good in terms of
     expertise but establishing modern infrastructure and better equipment, in particular for the
     police, is at an early stage. A more integrated approach for training of staff, in particular as
     regards criminal analysis, is required. An ethical code for law enforcement agents remains to
     be developed in line with international best practice. A national strategy against organised
     crime in line with EU best practice is not yet adopted. Enhancing co-operation,



EN                                                  63                                                  EN
      communication and co-ordination between the various law enforcement authorities, as well as
     with the prosecutors, is at an early stage.

     Progress has continued in the field of trafficking in human beings. The Government
     maintained co-operation with the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) in this field.
     The Counter-Trafficking Programme continued. The free emergency helpline for trafficking
     victims rescued in total 98 individuals as of August 2006. There was a sharp increase in the
     number of the individuals assisted for their return to their countries of origin. In 2005, out of
     256 persons identified as victims of trafficking, 220 received direct assistance for return. 125
     traffickers were arrested in 2005 and 330 were arrested as of September 2006. In addition to
     the Istanbul shelter opened in 2004, an Ankara-based shelter for victims of trafficking was set
     up. In February, a co-operation and information exchange protocol was signed with Moldova.
     Turkey's legislation is well aligned with EU legislation on fighting trafficking in human
     beings; however, increased efforts are needed to enhance the administrative capacity to deal
     with prevention and repression of trafficking as the problem in the region is on the rise.

     Limited progress can be reported with regard to the fight against money laundering. The
     amended Anti-Terror Law classifies "financing of terrorism" as a separate offence. A draft
     law bringing legislation closer to the acquis is pending in Parliament.

     Alignment with international instruments remains limited. Turkey has not signed the Council
     of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from
     Crime.

     In the area of fight against terrorism Turkey has signed the International Convention for the
     Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Council of Europe Convention on the
     Prevention of Terrorism. A Supreme Council on Counter Terrorism made up of all the
     relevant institutions was established. The Council is responsible for taking the necessary
     measures on anti-terrorism and preparing the recommendations to be issued by the Council of
     Ministers. An Anti-Terror law was adopted in July 2006 providing for a much wider
     definition of terrorist activities and terrorists. The Law increases penalties for offences
     committed for terrorist purposes and introduces financing of terrorism as an offence, while
     restricting the rights of defence. (see also Political Criteria).

     In the area of the fight against drugs limited progress can be reported. A national strategy in
     line with the EU Drug Strategy 2005-2012 and the EU Drug Action Plan 2005-2012 is not yet
     in place. Drug trafficking remains an area of concern. However, some seizures have occurred
     resulting from international co-operation with police forces in the Member States and
     controlled deliveries. No progress has been made with regard to the establishment of a mini
     Dublin group in Ankara. A network for information collection along the standards of the
     EMCDDA needs to be further developed. The Reitox Focal Point was established, but
     resources for its functioning need to be enhanced. Inter-agency cooperation of the many
     government bodies involved in the fight against drugs should be firmly enhanced, by ensuring
     the necessary financial and staff resources. Alignment remains limited in this area.

     Some progress has been made in the field of customs co-operation. Good progress has been
     made on staff training and staff ethics. However, further efforts are required to establish a
     closer working relationship between police and customs services for the prevention and the
     fight against crime. Preparation for implementation of the Convention on mutual assistance
     and cooperation between customs administration (Naples II) needs to be enhanced. In terms




EN                                                  64                                                   EN
      of alignment with the acquis, the lack of specific legislation on data protection hampers a
     smooth functioning of law enforcement aspects of customs co-operation.

     Limited progress has been made in the field of judicial cooperation in criminal and civil
     matters. The legal system does not allow for direct involvement between judicial authorities,
     direct execution of foreign decisions, abolishment of dual criminality and restricting the scope
     of refusal grounds. Gradual alignment with private international law, legislation on access to
     justice and on insolvency proceedings needs to be ensured. Legislation regarding judicial co-
     operation in criminal matters is not in line with EU standards, in particular extradition of both
     Turkish and foreign citizens, the application of the ne bis in idem principle, environmental
     crime, provisions on victims' rights in the framework of criminal proceedings and the
     implementation of the European Arrest Warrant. Turkey is a member of the European
     Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (1959) and its Protocol (1978).
     However, it has not signed the second additional protocol to the Convention (2001).
     Ratification of the Additional Protocol would bring Turkey closer to alignment with the
     acquis regarding provisions on joint investigation teams. Turkey is preparing for its
     participation in Eurojust. Legislative alignment both in civil and criminal judicial cooperation
     remains limited, in particular the lack of specific legislation dealing with Mutual Legal
     Assistance (MLA).

     Overall, some progress can be reported, particularly in the areas of asylum, border
     management, fight against trafficking in human beings, customs and police cooperation.
     Alignment with the acquis in this chapter is underway but considerable and sustained efforts
     are required in areas such as migration, the fight against organised crime, money laundering
     and judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters.

     4.25.    Chapter 25: Science & Research

     Further good progress was achieved in science and research, both with respect to actions
     rendering the environment towards research more favourable and with respect to research
     collaboration with the EU. Turkey continued to be associated with the 6th Framework
     Programme for Research and Technological Development (FP6), but is not yet associated
     with the Euratom Framework Programme. Turkey also cooperates actively with the Joint
     Research Centre (direct actions).

     Turkey's research policy resulted in significantly increased budgets for research and
     development: nearly fivefold compared to 2002 levels. New universities have been opened in
     15 cities. Improvements were also achieved in Turkey’s science and research capacities
     including its gradually more successful participation in FP6. Turkey's success rate under FP6
     improved and is now about 17%. However, it is below the EU averages of about 20%. In
     terms of funding, Turkey was mostly successful in obtaining small projects. However, EU
     funding is not achieving its potential.

     Taking into account actions that Turkey has taken with respect to mobility of researchers,
     science and society and 3% of GDP for Science and Technology Action Plan measures,
     Turkey is already well integrated into the European Research Area.

     Involvement of the private sector and SME in research, and under FP6, is very low. The
     number of scientists is below the EU average. Research is not sufficiently integrated in the
     education curricula. The Turkish Scientific and Technological Research Council (TÜBITAK)
     initiated new support programmes and recruited 50 young experts. The lack of legal clarity



EN                                                  65                                                   EN
      regarding the constitutionality of recent amendments in the laws regulating the appointment
     of the 14 Science Council members and its president, as well as university rectors, persists.

     Conclusion

     Some further progress was made, notably in the participation in EU research programmes, and
     regarding national budget allocations. Overall, Turkey is well prepared for accession in the
     area of science and research, and is fairly advanced in designing and applying an integrated
     research strategy.

     4.26.    Chapter 26: Education & Culture

     Good progress has been made in the area of education, training and youth. Turkey has been
     participating successfully in the Community Programmes Leonardo da Vinci, Socrates, and
     Youth, and measures have been taken to encourage a nation-wide coverage of the
     programmes. In view of the considerable past increase in the number of applications, and
     Turkey's intention to substantially enhance participation in the future Lifelong Learning and
     Youth in Action programmes, the responsible National Agency would benefit from further
     consolidation and easing of certain procedural requirements. Turkey has started to participate
     actively in the Education and Training 2010 Work Programme Coordination Group and in
     several clusters. Progress has been made in increasing enrolment ratios at all educational
     levels, although they remain significantly below OECD averages. A well-publicised girls’
     education campaign has had success. Revised curricula for primary as well as vocational
     education are being implemented or piloted. Turkey participates in the development of a
     European Qualifications Framework, but a national qualifications system has not been
     established yet. Participation rates in lifelong learning are very low but have increased to 2%
     in 2005, compared to 1.1% in 2000. Progress has continued in the implementation of the
     Bologna process in higher education with the European Credit Transfer System having
     become mandatory in Turkey in June.

     Turkey has started to participate in the Community programme Culture 2000. Turkey has
     supported the adoption of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of
     Diversity of Cultural Expression, and has launched internal procedures for ratification.
     Istanbul has applied to become European Capital of Culture for 2010.

     Conclusion

     Further good progress has been achieved. Alignment is nearly complete and overall Turkey is
     well prepared for accession in this area. Efforts in line with the Lisbon strategy need to
     continue, in particular on lifelong learning.

     4.27.    Chapter 27: Environment

     No substantial progress can be reported in the field of horizontal legislation. The overall
     level of alignment in this area is limited. Turkey has not ratified the Kyoto Protocol, nor has it
     transposed the Emissions Trading Directive and related decisions. Though some elements are
     present in the current Turkish legislation, no progress can be reported on the transposition and
     implementation of the environment liability and reporting directives. No progress has been
     made as regards further transposition of the directive related to public access to environment
     information. Some elements of the directive on public participation have been transposed
     through a new Law on Environment adopted in May 2006. Turkish legislation on the



EN                                                  66                                                    EN
      Environment Impact Assessment continues to exclude trans-boundary consultation
     requirements. Some activities, such as mining, are not included and public consultation needs
     improvement. Turkey has not yet become a party to the Espoo nor the Aarhus Conventions.
     No timetable is available with respect to future membership status of these conventions. The
     strategic environmental assessment directive remains to be transposed. Preparations in this
     area are limited.

     As regards air quality legislation, some progress can be reported. There has been no progress
     as regards alignment to the Air Framework Directive and related Directives. However, a
     twinning project is under way. The network of monitoring stations in line with acquis
     requirements was established in 36 cities. Good progress has been made as regards the
     transposition of the directives relating to quality of petrol and diesel fuels and reduction of
     sulphur content of certain liquid fuels. No further progress has been made as regards
     alignment of the directive on Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) emissions. The National
     Emission Ceilings directive has not yet been transposed. Preparations in this area require
     substantial efforts.

     Transposition of the acquis on waste management is already well advanced. Alignment with
     the Waste Framework Directive is high and the Hazardous Waste Directive has been
     transposed. Further alignment is needed, for example on legislation regarding polychlorinated
     biphenyls, end-of-life vehicles, waste from electrical/electronic equipment, restriction of
     certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment, landfills and waste
     incineration. With the support of a twinning project, technical studies are underway as regards
     further transposition and implementation of a number of waste streams directives as well as
     the Landfill directive. A national plan on waste management is expected to address remaining
     shortcomings. A financing plan needs to be further developed. Preparations in this area are
     under way.

     Progress can be reported in the field of water quality acquis. Good progress was made by
     transposing legislation on urban waste treatment and quality of bathing water. However,
     financing plans remain to be established. No steps were undertaken to align with the Water
     Framework Directive to allow new relevant investments to comply with the acquis. Nor has
     Turkey initiated steps to develop trans-boundary water cooperation, in particular with
     Member States. No progress has been made as regards alignment, or further alignment,
     concerning other directives in the water quality field. The level of transposition is low,
     particularly as regards nitrates, ground water and drinking water. Overall, the institutional
     capacity remains weakened by an unclear division of responsibilities.

     With the adoption of the regulation on the protection of wildlife habitats, some progress was
     made in aligning with the acquis on nature protection. However, transposition,
     implementation and enforcement, remain very low. The continuing rapid loss of habitats
     causes concern. Legislation in policy areas linked to nature protection requires attention. The
     institutional capacity is weakened by insufficiently clear definition of responsibilities amongst
     the authorities concerned.

     No progress can be reported in the area of industrial pollution control and risk
     management. Alignment with the acquis remains very low. Some technical studies are under
     way. The Seveso, Large Combustion Plants, IPPC and Solvents directives remain to be
     transposed. Alignment, implementation and enforcement require significant efforts including
     the deployment of considerable financial resources.




EN                                                  67                                                   EN
      The level of alignment on noise remains advanced. Implementation is lagging behind, for
     example in providing financial resources and strengthening the administrative capacity of
     competent authorities related to the preparation of strategic noise maps and action plans. A
     timetable for preparations of plans was defined. Preparations in this area are on track.

     No progress can be reported in the chemicals sector. The overall level of harmonisation on
     chemicals remains very low. Administrative capacity is insufficient for effective transposition
     and implementation.

     No progress can be reported on genetically modified organisms. No progress was made
     aligning the acquis in the area of forestry. Turkey has a well developed administrative
     capacity, though implementation requires attention.

     Progress was made as regards administrative capacity. The amended Environmental Law
     defines a clearer role for the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, allows for recruitment of
     additional staff, as well as for additional financial resources in the environment sector. The
     introduction of higher fines and entry into force of the penal code's provisions envisaging
     sanctions for environmental crimes are expected to improve inspection and enforcement.
     Sustainable development needs to be introduced as a cross-cutting policy, in particular in
     energy, transport and agriculture policies. The amended Law also provides for enhancement
     of public access to environmental information and liability. Turkey has however, as yet, not
     fulfilled the short term priority to adopt a revised programme for transposition and
     implementation of the acquis. The institutional capacity of the regional environmental
     authorities needs strengthening. The management of human resources needs attention.

     Conclusion

     With the exception of waste management and noise, the overall level of transposition of the
     environmental acquis remains low. The lack of progress on horizontal legislation is of
     increasing concern, in particular on trans-boundary issues and on public consultation. Limited
     progress in transposing the acquis was achieved in the field of air quality, nature protection,
     and water quality. When implemented, the amended Environmental Law will strengthen the
     institutional capacity. The track record on enforcement remains weak.

     4.28.   Chapter 28: Consumer and Health Protection

     On safety related measures no further progress was made in legislative alignment. Specific
     product safety standards are lacking an appropriate legal basis. The former general product
     safety directive is transposed, but not the new directive. Strengthening co-ordination between
     ministries, as well as customs, is needed.

     Some progress can be reported regarding market surveillance of product safety. Several
     ministries, with improved availability of resources and trained personnel, carried out market
     surveillances in accordance with the so-called new approach directives. In line with the
     Accession Partnership priorities, institutional structures were improved. Coordination
     amongst the relevant authorities increased moderately. Also, the advisory Market Surveillance
     Coordination Board developed guidance. The Ministry of Trade and Industry consulted
     stakeholders to improve the quality of the legislative process.

     However, guidelines on internal procedures for inspectors are insufficiently clear. Many
     products are without the CE marking. Developing a collective system for notification of



EN                                                 68                                                  EN
      dangerous products, as well as investigating possibilities to internationally exchange findings
     of non-compliant products, are both short term priorities under the Accession Partnership
     which were not met.

     In the area of protection of the economic interest of consumers, there was limited progress,
     but the level of alignment remained high. A new Law on the Use of Credit Cards entered into
     force. The administrative capacity improved via training and recruitment. However, a high
     turn-over of members of district consumer arbitration committees indicates that increased
     efforts are needed to safeguard the level of knowledge. The approach of ministries, judiciary,
     arbitration committees and consumer organisations lacks consistency.

     Consumer organisations are represented in the consultative consumer council that meets
     annually. The consumer movement remains weak nonetheless.

     Some progress was made in the area of public health. Legislation on tobacco control was
     adopted. However, further alignment is needed related to the maximum tar yield of cigarettes.
     An unclear division of responsibilities between the Ministry of Health and the Tobacco
     Products and Alcoholic Beverages Market Regulation Board affects the administrative
     capacity.

     Turkey has partially aligned its existing surveillance system of communicable diseases with
     the Union's lists. Good progress was made in setting up a network for epidemiological
     surveillance and control. Furthermore, Turkey continued to update its national plan for
     influenza preparedness in good cooperation with EU institutions and agencies. However,
     alignment of case definitions of diseases is at an early stage. Modernizing testing laboratories
     is lagging behind. . The Ministry of Health is preparing a National Plan of Action that is to set
     a timetable and allocate responsibilities address shortcomings.

     Progress was made on early warning of outbreaks by introducing real time data collection by
     family physicians into a central electronic database at the Ministry of Health. However,
     implementation needs to be ensured to avoid fragmentation of information.

     The Ministry of Health continues to closely follow up WHO strategies for the vaccine
     preventable diseases. With respect to the fight against HIV/AIDS, Turkey continues to be a
     low prevalence country on the basis of the available data. As regards blood, tissues, cells and
     organs as life savers and substances of human origins, Turkey has not aligned its legislation.

     Conclusion

     On consumer protection, progress was made, notably on a market surveillance system.
     However, implementation remains weak. Turkey made progress in the area of public health,
     in particular by setting up a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of
     communicable diseases.

     4.29.    Chapter 29: Customs Union

     With regard to customs rules limited progress can be reported. Turkey started to enforce the
     International Convention on the Harmonisation of Frontier Controls of Goods as of June
     2006. Turkey amended its duty relief legislation but did not align it with the acquis. The
     establishment of tax free shops at arrivals is still allowed; the maximum amount of goods,
     bought in tax free shops, per traveller is higher than permitted in the EU.



EN                                                  69                                                   EN
      As regards free trade zones no progress has been made, although this is a short term priority
     in the Accession Partnership. The free trade zones are not part of the Turkish customs
     territory, which is not in line with the acquis. In addition, the application of customs valuation
     rules is not entirely in line with internationally accepted rules.

     The customs union between the EU and Turkey has led to an advanced level of alignment in
     the field of customs. However, in some areas such as free trade zones, customs duty relief,
     transit, fight against counterfeit goods, and post-clearance Turkey still needs to align its
     legislation with that of the EU. As far as the functioning of the EC-Turkey Customs Union is
     concerned see also Chapter 1 – Free movement of goods and Chapter 30 – External relations.
     Furthermore, Turkey does not fully apply the provisions of the customs union vis-à-vis the
     Republic of Cyprus.

     During the reporting period the Undersecretariat of Customs continued to strengthen its
     administrative and operational capacity in line with accession partnership indications.

     The enforcement records increased significantly due to the efficiency of the GÜMSİS
     Customs Security System, risk analysis process and expertise on anti-smuggling activities.
     The total number of automated customs offices and the number of customs offices using the
     Electronic Data Interchange System (EDIS) increased further. As of December 2005, nearly
     100% of all transactions made were processed electronically. In 2005, 71% of import and
     export declarations have been made through EDIS.

     The recent modernisation efforts in Turkish customs have continued to improve its
     enforcement record. However, Turkey should undertake a comprehensive effort to improve
     overall training quality of customs officers.

     Coordination between customs and other relevant public authorities such as the Ministry of
     Culture, Turkish Patent Institute, Turkish police force and IPR courts needs to be considerably
     improved.

     Concerning mutual administrative assistance agreements, an agreement was signed with
     Bahrain.

     Conclusion

     The customs union has prepared Turkey for a high level of alignment. However, in some
     areas such as free trade zones, customs duty relief, fight against counterfeit goods, and post-
     clearance, legislation is not yet aligned. Turkey has to abolish duty-free shops at incoming
     points. Further efforts are needed to strengthen administrative capacity, including the timely
     preparation for IT-interconnectivity and operating with the Community IT systems.

     4.30.    Chapter 30: External Relations

     Turkey has made some progress with regard to the common commercial policy. Turkey
     amended its General System of Preferences (GSP) as indicated by the accession partnership.
     It now covers to a large extent the EC-incentive arrangements. However, graduation is not
     fully aligned, Turkey has not included Armenia and Myanmar in its GSP regime and its sector
     definition excludes agriculture and steel products.

     Turkey made an increased use of the safeguard instrument, imposing measures on several
     products such as salt, steam irons, vacuum cleaners, footwear and motor cycles. The choice of


EN                                                  70                                                    EN
      safeguard measures which also affects EU exports (even if they are not the main source of the
     problem) is not in line with Customs Union requirements to opt for measures which least
     distort mutual trade. Furthermore, Turkey has introduced supplementary origin certificates for
     certain goods.

     The level of coordination of Turkey with the EU within World Trade Organisation, in
     particular as regards GATS and the Doha Development Agenda and the OECD needs
     attention. Turkey often does not align its position with EU. Overall Turkey's level of
     alignment with the EC's common commercial policy is advanced and in line with Turkey's
     Customs Union obligations. However, it should be noted that a number of infringements of
     the EU-Turkey Customs Union remain (see Chapter 1 - Free movement of goods, Chapter 29
     - Customs union), which are distorting bi-lateral trade relations with Turkey.

     No developments can be reported regarding medium-and long-term export credits to
     companies and dual-use goods. Overall Turkey's level of alignment with the EC's bilateral
     agreements is reasonably satisfactory.

     Concerning bilateral agreements with third countries, some progress has been made.
     Turkey signed a free trade agreement (FTA) with Egypt. The FTA with Morocco entered into
     force. Negotiations with Albania have been materially concluded. Turkey has continued free
     trade negotiations with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), Jordan, and Lebanon.

     In the field of development policy and humanitarian aid, some progress was made. Turkey
     granted € 500 million official development aid in 2005. The primary beneficiaries of Turkish
     official development aid were Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan and
     Kosovo. Turkey offered € 37.4 million emergency aid, mainly allocated to natural disaster
     relief in Asia. Overall, Turkey's level of alignment with the EC's development and
     humanitarian aid policy improved considerably.

     Conclusion

     Overall Turkey made progress in alignment in this area. However, a number of open issues
     remain.

     4.31.   Chapter 31: Foreign, Security and Defence Policy

     Turkey has broadly continued to align its foreign and security policy with that of the
     European Union. The regular enhanced political dialogue established as part of the accession
     strategy with Turkey has continued.

     Turkey has displayed its strong interest in the development of the European Security and
     Defence Policy (ESDP). Turkey has been participating in the EU-led police missions in
     Bosnia – Herzegovina (EUPM), in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (Proxima)
     and in the Democratic Republic of Congo (EUROPOL KINSHASA). Turkey’s participation
     in several UN and NATO peace missions in the Balkans continues. After participating in
     UNPROFOR, IFOR, KFOR and SFOR missions, Turkey is contributing to the EUFOR-
     ALTHEA mission since December 2004.

     Despite Turkey’s active contribution to the ESDP certain difficulties have prevailed. Turkey
     has been resisting the inclusion of the Republic of Cyprus and Malta in the EU-NATO
     strategic cooperation based on the “Berlin Plus” agreement. As regards Cyprus, Turkey has



EN                                                71                                                  EN
      continued, for political reasons, to block Cyprus’ membership in certain suppliers' groups,
     such as the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use
     Goods and Technologies.

     Turkey is party to most of the existing international regimes for non-proliferation of weapons
     of mass destruction, including in particular the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear
     weapons and its additional protocol, and has stated that it has aligned itself with the EU Code
     of Conduct on Arms Exports, though no formal notification of a Government decision in this
     respect has been made. Work is in progress for Turkey’s full alignment with the EU system.
     Compliance, through effective enforcement, with both the Code of Conduct and the Joint
     Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons should allow Turkey to achieve effective control
     of the production, trade, transfers and detention of small arms, light weapons and their
     ammunitions. Turkey has ratified the UN Protocol on Fire Arms.

     Concerning the Common Foreign and Security Policy, Turkey’s broad alignment with EU
     sanctions and restrictive measures, statements, declarations, and demarches has continued.

     Turkey has continued to support the Middle East Peace Process. Turkey declared in
     February 2006 to share the objectives EU Common Position on the application of specific
     measures to combat terrorism and ensure that its national policies would conform to that
     Common Position. Hamas is on the list included in this Common Position. Turkey has
     expressed its interest in participating in European Union Police Mission for the Palestinian
     Territories. Turkey has expressed its interest in participating in police and other ESDP
     operations in the Palestinian Territories

     Relations with Syria continued to develop positively. Turkey has exerted efforts to convince
     the Syrian leadership to comply with international requests, in particular as concerns UN
     Decision 1636 in relation with the UN Commission’s investigation into the assassination of
     the former Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri. In September, the Parliament adopted the
     government motion on contributing Turkish troops to the UNIFIL mission to Lebanon.

     Turkey has taken concrete initiatives to promote stability in Iraq by facilitating dialogue
     between US authorities and Sunni Arabs. Turkey argues that there is a direct link between the
     recent escalation of violence in the Southeast of Turkey and increased clashes between
     Turkish Armed Forces and the PKK and “infiltration of PKK members” from the Iraqi border.
     A significant number of troops were deployed along the Iraqi border in order to prevent
     infiltration by PKK terrorist from Northern Iraq.

     Turkish officials have encouraged Iran to comply with the demands of the international
     community. Turkey has supported EU efforts to obtain long-term guarantees for the
     implementation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and its Nuclear Safeguards
     Agreement with the IAEA by Iran.

     Turkey’s strong support for the “Bonn process” concerning the reconstruction of Afghanistan
     continues. Turkey assumed, on a rotational basis with France and Italy, the joint leadership of
     the Regional Command in Kabul as of August 2006.

     Since the official exchange of letters between the Turkish Prime Minister and the Armenian
     President in April 2005, there have been no significant developments in relations with
     Armenia. Turkey has not opened its border with this country. This would be an important




EN                                                 72                                                  EN
      step forward in the establishment of good neighbourly relations. It would be beneficial to both
     sides, in particular with respect to trade.

     A closer alignment of Turkey’s official position with EU positions in relation with Southern
     Caucasus and Central Asia has been observed. Turkey has reiterated its support for the
     European Neighbourhood Policy. Turkey participates in the regional initiative GUAM
     (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova) with observer status. Turkey followed closely
     the elections in Azerbaijan. It aligned itself with the EU Presidency statement on the
     elections in Azerbaijan on 10 November 2005.

     There was no progress regarding Turkey’s signature of the Statute of the International
     Criminal Court.

     Turkey continues to play an active role in the international campaign to combat terrorism. It
     signed the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism in
     September 2005 as well as the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism
     in January 2006. Turkey needs to continue aligning with EU positions. Its counter-terrorism
     legislation and policies also need to be aligned with with EU practices.

     In terms of administrative capacity, the organisation of the Turkish Foreign Ministry is
     compatible with EU CFSP structures. The Deputy Undersecretary for European Affairs fulfils
     the post of political director. There are also the posts of European correspondent and deputy
     European correspondent. EU communication within the CFSP takes place via the ACN
     information to which the Turkish foreign ministry is linked. EU communication within the
     CFSP takes place via the ACN network, to which the Turkish foreign ministry is linked.

     Conclusion

     Turkey’s overall alignment with EU Common Foreign and Security Policy has continued. In
     order to promote regional stability, Turkey has intensified its foreign policy activity in the
     Middle East, in Iran and in Iraq. Turkey maintains its border with Armenia closed. Turkish
     authorities have expressed keen interest in ESDP missions as well as in the European Defence
     Agency. However, Turkey’s participation in the ESDP continues to present certain
     difficulties. Turkey continues to block the participation of Cyprus and Malta in EU-NATO
     strategic cooperation. Similarly, Turkey is still opposing Cyprus’ accession to the Wassenaar
     Arrangement. Turkey has yet to sign the International Criminal Court statute. As regards
     Greece, relations have continued to develop positively. Turkey should however address any
     sources of friction with its neighbours and refrain from any action which could negatively
     affect the peaceful settlement of border disputes. Turkey should be unequivocally committed
     to good neighbourly relations, and to the other requirements against which progress will be
     measured, in accordance with paragraph 6 of the negotiating framework.

     4.32.   Chapter 32: Financial control

     There has been some progress in the area of public internal financial control. The Public
     Financial Management and Control Law as well as the relevant article of the Constitution on
     budget were amended in December 2005 and all the provisions of the Public Financial
     Management and Control Law, including those on budget execution, entered into force on 1
     January 2006.




EN                                                 73                                                  EN
      The amendment introduces both positive and negative developments. The revision of the
     terminology utilised in the Law, with the exception of the definition of "ex ante control",
     brings it in line with internationally agreed definitions. The Law also introduces a tri-annual
     budget for the period of 2006-2008. However, the restructuring of revolving funds rather than
     their elimination as envisaged in the original Law and the exclusion of a considerable number
     of public institutions from the scope of the Law represent significant deviations from sound
     financial control principles. The Law establishing Development Agencies (see Chapter 22),
     enacted in January 2006, also exempts the new Development Agencies from the scope of the
     Public Financial Management and Control Law.

     Turkey enacted some of the implementing legislation of the Public Financial Management
     and Control Law, that is to be fully operational by the end of 2007. The process of
     establishing the strategy development units as well as the appointment of personnel have
     started. Most secondary legislation has been adopted, but its implementation is incomplete.
     Internal audit, which is one of the main pillars of the reform, has not yet become operational.

     The Internal Audit Coordination Board, which was established in 2004, is operational.
     However, this Board should be considered an advisory body and its present harmonisation
     and coordination tasks need to be transferred to a permanent central harmonisation unit to
     ensure that these responsibilities are carried out adequately. The Board of State Accounting
     Standards was established in 2005, with a mandate to determine and publish accounting and
     reporting standards applicable to public bodies falling under the category of general
     government. Necessary structures were established with the circular of the Prime Ministry in
     2005.

     In the area of external audit, there is no development to be reported since the last Regular
     Report. The Public Financial Management and Control Law extended the external audit
     mandate of the Turkish Court of Accounts, both in terms of scope and type. To address these
     requirements, and to become aligned with the acquis, Turkey now needs to adopt a revised
     TCA charter, based on INTOSAI standards, that is currently before parliament.

     There has been some progress in the field of protection of EU financial interests. Turkey
     has still not enacted the implementing legislation to the Public Financial Management and
     Financial Control Law that is required for the protection of EC financial interests. However, a
     mechanism for the auditing of EU funds has been established within the office of the National
     Authorising Officer and operates in accordance with relevant EU-Turkey agreements. It will
     be necessary, however, to establish unequivocal links with the PIFC system. This mechanism
     needs to be reinforced with an operationally independent anti-fraud co-ordinating structure
     (AFCOS), which would co-ordinate all legislative, administrative and operational aspects of
     the protection of the Communities’ financial interests and notify the Commission Services of
     suspected fraud and irregularities. The Commission therefore welcomes the nomination of the
     Prime Ministry Inspection Board as a contact point for OLAF, pending the establishment of
     an AFCOS. Turkey still needs to fully align its legislation under the PIF-Convention and its
     protocols. Preparations in this area are underway. Turkish administrative structures have been
     accredited to manage pre-accession funds under the Decentralised Implementation System
     (DIS), but severe shortcomings in its functioning have occurred in the reporting period. These
     are being addressed by the Turkish Government.

     In the field of the protection of the euro against counterfeiting, Turkey has sufficient
     expertise in relation to analysis and classification of counterfeited notes and coins. There is
     also an adequate level of police capacity across the four law enforcement bodies. Turkey has


EN                                                 74                                                  EN
      established the Counterfeit Monitoring System under the mandate of the Central Bank of
     Turkey in August 2005. This initiative needs to be complemented by the establishment of a
     national analysis centre, a national coin analysis centre and a national central office. Sanctions
     for credit institutions failing to withdraw counterfeits from circulation need to be established.
     A provision is also needed for sanctions against medals and tokens similar to Euro coins.
     Preparations in this area are on track.




EN                                                  75                                                    EN
      Conclusion

     Overall, there was some progress in this chapter. Although some of the relevant
     administrative structures as well as the implementing legislation are in place, Turkey needs to
     update its 2002 PIFC policy paper and increase efforts to render the Public Financial
     Management and Control Law fully operational.

     Turkey still needs to establish the necessary authorities to ensure cooperation with the
     European Anti-Fraud Office, as well as with the relevant Commission services for the
     protection of the euro against counterfeiting.

     4.33.   Chapter 33: Financial and Budgetary Provisions

     With regard to the application of the EU own resources system, some progress can be
     reported.

     Concerning traditional own resources, customs legislation in Turkey is largely in line with the
     acquis. While Turkey enacted a new Law on Statistics in November 2005, which improves
     alignment in this area, implementing legislation still needs to be adopted. Further alignment is
     particularly needed with respect to implementation of the ESA95 standards to ensure the
     appropriate measurement of Gross National Income.

     Measures for combating fraud in VAT and customs duties are needed. Turkey enacted the law
     establishing the Presidency of Revenue Administration in May 2005 with the objective of
     enhancing tax revenue collection and voluntary taxpayer compliance. As the implementing
     legislation has not been fully enacted, its impact remains to be determined. A single unit will
     need to be designated for central coordination of the proper collection, monitoring, payment
     and control of funds to and from the EC budget. Turkey will also need to strengthen its
     administrative capacity further in the relevant policy areas mentioned elsewhere in this
     Report, such as agriculture, customs, taxation, statistics and financial control.

     Conclusion

     Although the acquis in this area does not require transposition, Turkey will need to establish
     in due course the coordination structures and implementing rules to ensure the correct
     calculation, collection, payment and control of own resources as well as reporting to the EU
     for implementation of the own resources rules.




EN                                                 76                                                   EN
                                                                                                               STATISTICAL ANNEX
 STATISTICAL DATA (as of the 10th of September 2006)

 Turkey



                                                                                                          Foot-
                                                                                    Scale         Unit             1995           1996     1997       1998       1999        2000        2001        2002        2003        2004        2005
                                                                                                          note
 Basic data

 Population: total                                                                Thousand Number        1)       61763,0     62909,0     64064,0    65215,0    66350,0     67420,0     68365,0     69302,0     70231,0     71152,0     72065,0

 Total area of the country                                                        Unit (x1)   km²        2)       783562,0    783562,0    783562,0   783562,0   783562,0   783562,0    783562,0    783562,0    783562,0    783562,0    783562,0



 National accounts                                                                Scale       Unit                 1995           1996     1997       1998       1999        2000        2001        2002        2003        2004        2005


                                                                                              National
 Gross domestic product                                                           Million     currency   3)       7762.5e     14772.1e    28835.9e   52224.9e   77415.3e   124583.5e   178412.4e   277574.1e   359762.9e   430511.5e   487202.4e

 Gross domestic product                                                           Million     EUR        4)       129979e     144583e     167916e    180612e    172765e    216372e     163210e     192905e     213052e     242045e     291031e

 Gross domestic product per capita                                                Unit (x1)   EUR        5)        2109,0      2306,0      2688,0     2846,0     2685,0     3207,0      2379,0      2771,0      3013,0      3372,0      4038,0


 SI: Growth rate of Gross domestic product at constant prices (national
 currency), relative to the previous year                                         Unit (x1)   %                     7,2            7,0      7,5        3,1        -4,7        7,4        -7,5         7,9         5,8         8,9         7,4

 SI: Employment growth (national accounts), relative to the previous year         Unit (x1)   %                      :              :        :          :          :           :           :           :           :           :           :


 Labour productivity growth: growth in GDP (constant prices) per person
 employed, relative to the previous year                                          Unit (x1)   %          6)          :              :        :          :          :           :         -6,5         8,8         6,1          :           :

 SI: Unit labour cost growth (national accounts), relative to the previous year   Unit (x1)   %          7)          :              :        :          :          :           :         -4,6          :           :           :           :

 GDP per capita at current prices                                                 Unit (x1)   PPS        8)        4600e          5000e    5500e      5700e      5500        6000        5300        5600        5800        6500        7200

 SI: GDP per capita at current prices, PPS, EU-25=100                             Unit (x1)   %          8)          :            30.6e    32.2e      31.8e       29,2       29,8        25,6        26,1        26,5        28,5        30,7

 SI: Labour productivity, PPS (GDP per person employed), EU-25=100                Unit (x1)   %          8)          :            36.5e    39.6e      39.2e       36,2       39.4f       35.2f       37.0f       38.5f       40.7f       43.8f

 Agriculture (NACE Sections A+B): share of total gross value added                Unit (x1)   %                     15,0          15,9      13,6       16,9       14,6       13,6        11,4        11,4        11,6        11,1          :
 Industry (excluding construction) (NACE Sections C to E): share of total gross
 value added                                                                      Unit (x1)   %                     25,8          24,2      24,2       21,4       21,9       22,5        24,2        24,3        23,8        23,8          :

 Construction (NACE Section F): share of total gross value added                  Unit (x1)   %                     5,4            5,6      5,8        5,6        5,4         5,1         4,8         3,9         3,3         3,4          :

 Services (NACE Sections G to P): share of total gross value added                Unit (x1)   %                     53,8          54,3      56,4       56,1       58,1       58,8        59,6        60,5        61,3        61,7          :

 Final consumption expenditure, as a share of GDP                                 Unit (x1)   %                     79,4          81,2      80,6       79,9       81,6       83,4        81,8        80,2        80,5        79,9        81,6

 Final consumption expenditure: household and NPISH, as a share of GDP            Unit (x1)   %                     68,9          69,3      68,3       67,5       67,4       69,7        68,3        66,3        66,8        66,6        68,3

 Final consumption expenditure: General government, as a share of GDP             Unit (x1)   %                     10,6          11,9      12,3       12,4       14,2       13,7        13,5        13,9        13,7        13,3        13,2

 —Gross fixed capital formation, as a share of GDP                                Unit (x1)   %                     23,3          25,8      26,5       24,0       20,4       21,8        17,2        16,5        15,5        18,0        19,8

 —Stock variation, as a share of GDP                                              Unit (x1)   %                     1,6           -0,6      -1,3       -0,4       1,4         2,1        -1,3         4,7         7,3         8,0         5,3




EN                                                                                                                           77                                                                                                        EN
  Exports of goods and services, relative to GDP                                      Unit (x1)   %                19,5           22,2       24,7       23,8       21,7         23,4         32,0        29,2         27,5        29,1        27,8

 Imports of goods and services, relative to GDP                                      Unit (x1)   %                23,8           28,7       30,5       27,2       25,1         30,7         29,7        30,6         30,8        35,0        34,4



 Inflation rate                                                                      Scale       Unit             1995           1996      1997       1998        1999        2000          2001        2002        2003        2004        2005

 SI: Consumer price index: total (CPI), growth relative to the previous year         Unit (x1)   %        9)      76,0           79,8       99,1       69,7       68,8         39,0         68,5        29,7         18,4        9,3         7,7



 Balance of payments                                                                 Scale       Unit             1995           1996      1997       1998        1999        2000          2001        2002        2003        2004        2005

 Balance of payments: current account total                                          Million     EUR      10)    -1788,2     -1919,3      -2326,2     1769,7     -1257,3     -10633,4      3787,4      -1611,7     -7104,0     -12544,4    -18611,8

 Balance of payments current account: trade balance                                  Million     EUR      10)   -10055,0     -8083,5      -13269,4   -12534,2    -9556,2     -23775,4      -4168,2     -7702,0     -12385,1    -19196,1    -26465,7

 Balance of payments current account: exports of goods                               Million     EUR      10)    16541,2     25254,6      28314,7    27350,2    27061,4      33262,2      38379,9      42432,3     45267,0     53900,6     61851,1

 Balance of payments current account: imports of goods                               Million     EUR      10)   -26596,1     -33338,1     -41584,1   -39884,4   -36617,6     -57037,7     -42548,0    -50134,3     -57652,1    -73096,7    -88316,9

 Balance of payments current account: net services                                   Million     EUR      10)    7354,7       5242,8      9622,2     12047,2     7028,5      12306,2      10196,5      8332,3      9285,7      10277,4     11225,8

 Balance of payments current account: net income                                     Million     EUR      10)    -2450,3     -2305,2      -2656,9    -2662,6     -3318,6     -4333,0       -5582,8     -4818,1     -4912,5     -4531,7     -4551,9

 Balance of payments current account: net current transfers                          Million     EUR      10)    3362,4       3226,6       3977,8     4919,3     4589,0       5168,9       3341,9      2576,1       907,9       906,0       1180,0
 Balance of payments current account: net current transfers - of which
 government transfers                                                                Million     EUR      10)     818,8          437,1     276,9      141,8      339,7        231,7        231,1        528,8       263,4       259,7       495,9

 Direct investment (FDI) in the reporting economy                                    Million     EUR      10)     676,6          568,6     709,9      838,5      734,7        1063,2       3742,7      1202,4      1548,8       2317,7      7880,4



 Public finance                                                                      Scale       Unit             1995           1996      1997       1998        1999        2000          2001        2002        2003        2004        2005

 General government deficit/surplus, relative to GDP                                 Unit (x1)   %                  :              :         :          :           :         -14,5         -33,0       -12,9       -11,3        -5,7        -1,2

 SI: General government debt, relative to GDP                                        Unit (x1)   %                  :              :         :          :           :          57,4         104,4       93,0         85,1        76,9        69,7



 Financial indicators                                                                Scale       Unit             1995           1996      1997       1998        1999        2000          2001        2002        2003        2004        2005

 Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to GDP                            Unit (x1)   %        11)     45,2           43,8       44,6       47,8       56,3         59,7         77,1        71,3         60,1        54,0        47,3

 Gross foreign debt of the whole economy, relative to total exports                  Unit (x1)   %        12)      3,5            3,4       3,2        3,6         3,9         4,3           3,6         3,6         3,1         2,6         2,3

 Money supply: M1                                                                    Million     EUR             4968,0       6733,8       7028,5     7000,2     8635,3      12204,5       8965,1      9291,4      13188,2     15761,7     26483,1

 Money supply: M2                                                                    Million     EUR             16082,4     21960,6      25153,6    31205,8    41324,5      51590,9      37253,0      36325,6     47398,0     59415,0     96487,1

 Money supply: M3                                                                    Million     EUR             16796,7     23537,5      27196,3    32878,4    42950,0      54207,4      38973,5      38041,1     50487,7     63410,9     103583,4
 Total credit: credit by monetary financial institutions (MFIs) to total residents
 (consolidated)                                                                      Million     EUR             19992,3     26453,1      34081,6    30790,1    30856,1      44491,5      26976,9      20034,9     29025,2     43327,6     76195,0

 Interest rates: day-to-day money rate, per annum                                    Unit (x1)   %        13)     70,0           77,9       74,0       78,8       79,8         56,0         95,5        49,6         36,1        22,0        15,1

 Lending interest rate (one year), per annum                                         Unit (x1)   %        14)     105,1          99,2       99,4       79,5       86,1         51,2         78,8        53,7         42,8        29,1        23,8

 Deposit interest rate (one year), per annum                                         Unit (x1)   %        15)     91,7           92,8       93,0       93,3       85,5         38,2         62,2        53,9         40,3        23,6        19,9

 EUR exchange rates: average of period - 1 euro= … national currency                 Unit (x1)   Number   16)   59169,930   101979,910   170617,900 292797,660 445676,520   573942,460   1093683,470 1429766,050 1685301,160 1767685,880   1,66953

 EUR exchange rates: end of period - 1 euro= … national currency                     Unit (x1)   Number   16)   78137,000   133188,000   224970,000 366060,000 542096,000   618561,000   1268115,000 1703477,000 1745072,000 1826800,000    1,5904




EN                                                                                                                          78                                                                                                             EN
  Effective exchange rate index (1999=100)                                             Unit (x1)   Number            652,0         384,8    232,0     145,5     100,0       74,0       40,0       30,7       27,3       26,6        :

 Value of reserve assets (including gold)                                             Million     EUR        10)   10530,3    13904,9     17233,3   18493,7   22695,1    25095,4    22129,5    29701,9    31093,8    30262,7    42143,0

 Value of reserve assets (excluding gold)                                             Million     EUR        10)   9472,9     12815,5     16241,8   17590,9   21746,5    24006,3    20977,1    28348,9    29716,9    28948,3    40603,8



 External trade                                                                       Scale       Unit              1995          1996     1997      1998      1999       2000       2001       2002       2003       2004       2005

 Trade balance: (all goods, all partners)                                             Million     EUR                 :             :        :         :      -13387,3   -29262,5   -11193,5   -16341,3   -18620,1   -27636,9   -34560,1

 Value of exports: (all goods, all partners)                                          Million     EUR                 :             :        :         :      24964,0    30181,9    35062,2    38137,1    41515,9    50891,1    58849,5

 Value of imports : (all goods, all partners)                                         Million     EUR                 :             :        :         :      38351,3    59444,4    46255,8    54478,3    60136,0    78528,0    93409,5
 Terms of trade (export price index / import price index), relative to the previous
 year                                                                                 Unit (x1)   Number     17)    107,4         109,3    114,0     114,1     112,6      103,0      100,7      100,1      100,0      100,6       99,7

 Share of exports to EU-25 countries in value of total exports                        Unit (x1)   %                   :             :        :         :        56,1       54,3       53,8       53,9       55,1       54,5       52,4

 Share of imports from EU-25 countries in value of total imports                      Unit (x1)   %                   :             :        :         :        53,7       50,3       45,8       47,5       48,2       46,6       42,2



 Demography                                                                           Scale       Unit              1995          1996     1997      1998      1999       2000       2001       2002       2003       2004       2005

 Natural growth rate : crude rate of natural increase (births minus deaths)           Unit (x1)   per 1000   1)     16,8          16,8     16,5      16,0       15,4       14,1       13,8       13,5       13,2       12,9       12,6

 Net migration rate: number of immigrants minus the number of emigrants               Unit (x1)   per 1000            :             :        :         :         :          :          :          :          :          :          :


 Infant mortality rate: number of deaths of children under one year of age
 relative to 1000 live births                                                         Unit (x1)   Number     1)     43,0          40,9     38,8      36,5       33,9       28,9       27,8       26,7       25,6       24,6       23,6

 Life expectancy at birth: male                                                       Unit (x1)   Years      1)     65,6          65,9     66,3      66,7       67,1       68,1       68,2       68,4       68,6       68,8       68,9

 Life expectancy at birth: female                                                     Unit (x1)   Years      1)     70,2          70,6     70,9      71,3       71,8       72,8       73,0       73,2       73,4       73,6       73,8



 Labour market                                                                        Scale       Unit              1995          1996     1997      1998      1999       2000       2001       2002       2003       2004       2005


 Economic activity rate (15 - 64): proportion of the population aged 15-64 that is
 economically active                                                                  Unit (x1)   %          18)    56,8          56,4     55,2      55,3       55,2       52,4       52,3       52,3       51,1       51,5       51,3
 SI: Employment rate (15-64): proportion of the population aged 15-64 that is in
 employment                                                                           Unit (x1)   %                 52,4          52,5     51,3      51,4       50,8       48,9       47,8       46,7       45,5       46,1       45,9


 SI: Employment rate (15-64), male: proportion of the male population aged 15-
 64 that is in employment                                                             Unit (x1)   %                 74,6          74,9     74,8      74,3       72,7       71,7       69,3       66,9       65,9       67,9       68,2


 SI: Employment rate (15-64), female: proportion of the female population aged
 15-64 that is in employment                                                          Unit (x1)   %                 30,2          30,3     28,0      28,5       28,9       26,2       26,3       26,6       25,2       24,3       23,7


 SI: Employment rate of older workers (55-64): proportion of the population
 aged 55-64 that is in employment                                                     Unit (x1)   %                 41,7          41,6     40,5      41,1       39,3       36,3       35,9       35,3       32,7       33,1       30,8
 Agriculture, forestry and fishing (NACE Sections A+B) as a share of total
 employment                                                                           Unit (x1)   %          18)    44,1          43,7     41,7      41,5      40,2        36,0       37,6       34,9       33,9       34,0       29,5

 Industry (NACE Sections C to E) as a share of total employment                       Unit (x1)   %          18)    16,0          16,4     17,5      17,1       17,2       17,7       17,5       18,5       18,2       18,3       19,4

 Construction (NACE Sections F) as a share of total employment                        Unit (x1)   %          18)     6,0           6,1      6,2       6,1       6,2        6,3        5,2        4,5        4,6        4,7        5,3




EN                                                                                                                           79                                                                                                 EN
  Services (NACE Sections G to P) as a share of total employment                    Unit (x1)   %          19)   33,9         33,7    34,6    35,3    36,5    40,0    39,7    42,1    43,4    43,0    45,8

 SI: Unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is unemployed          Unit (x1)   %                 7,6          6,6     6,8     6,9     7,7     6,5     8,4    10,3    10,5    10,3    10,3
 SI: Unemployment rate, male: proportion of the male labour force that is
 unemployed                                                                        Unit (x1)   %                 7,8          6,9     6,5     6,9     7,7     6,6     8,7    10,7    10,7    10,5    10,3
 SI: Unemployment rate, female: proportion of the female labour force that is
 unemployed                                                                        Unit (x1)   %                 7,3          6,0     7,8     6,8     7,6     6,3     7,5     9,4    10,1     9,7    10,3


 Unemployment rate of persons < 25 years: proportion of the labour force aged
 <25 that is unemployed                                                            Unit (x1)   %                15,5         13,5    14,3    14,2    15,0    13,1    16,2    19,2    20,5    19,7    19,3
 SI: Long-term unemployment rate: proportion of the labour force that is long-
 term unemployed                                                                   Unit (x1)   %                 2,7          2,9     2,7     2,7     2,1     1,3     1,7     2,9     2,5     4,0     4,1



 Social cohesion                                                                   Scale       Unit             1995         1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005

 SI: Inequality of income distribution: ratio of top quintile to lowest quintile   Unit (x1)   Number     20)     :            :       :       :       :       :       :     10,8     9,9     9,9      :

 SI: Early school-leavers: proportion of the population aged 18-24 having not
 completed upper secondary education and who are currently not in any
 education or training                                                             Unit (x1)   %          21)     :            :       :       :       :     58,1    58,1    55,1    52,9    54,4    51,5

 SI: Children aged 0-17 living in jobless households: share of children aged 0-17 Unit (x1)    %                  :            :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :
 SI: Persons aged 18-59 living in jobless households: share of persons aged 18-
 59                                                                               Unit (x1)    %                  :            :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :       :



 Standard of living                                                                Scale       Unit             1995         1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005

 Number of passenger cars / population                                             Unit (x1)   per 1000         49,5         52,0    55,7    58,9    61,4    65,6    66,3    66,4    66,9    75,9    80,1

 Number of main telephone lines (fixed) / population                               Unit (x1)   per 1000   22)   215,8        227,1   245,8   260,1   272,1   272,8   276,5   272,9   269,3   268,8   263,3

 Number of subscriptions to cellular mobile telephone services / population        Unit (x1)   per 1000   22)    7,1         12,8    25,1    53,8    115,8   223,4   286,3   337,3   397,6   488,2   605,4



 Infrastructure                                                                    Scale       Unit             1995         1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005


                                                                                               per 1000
 Density of railway network (lines in operation)                                   Unit (x1)   km²        23)   10,8         11,0    11,0    11,0    11,1    11,1    11,1    11,0    11,1    11,1    11,1

 Length of motorways                                                               Thousand km            24)    1,2          1,4     1,5     1,7     1,7     1,8     1,9     1,9     1,9     1,9     1,8



 Industry and agriculture                                                          Scale       Unit             1995         1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005

 Industrial production volume index (2000=100)                                     Unit (x1)   Number             :            :       :       :       :     100,0   91,3    99,9    108,7   119,3   125,8


 Agricultural production volume indices of goods and services (at producer
 prices) (previous year = 100)                                                     Unit (x1)   Number           102,7        107,0   97,7    110,6   94,7    104,2   93,3    108,5   98,0    101,6   106,9



 Innovation and research                                                      Scale            Unit             1995         1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005
 SI: Spending on human resources (public expenditure on education) as a share
 of GDP                                                                       Unit (x1)        %          25)    2,3          2,4     2,4     3,1     3,6     3,5     3,7     3,6     3,8     3,8      :

 SI: Gross domestic expenditure on research & development, relative to GDP         Unit (x1)   %                 0,4          0,5     0,5     0,5     0,6     0,6     0,7     0,7     0,6     0,7      :




EN                                                                                                                      80                                                                           EN
   SI: Percentage of households who have Internet access at home. All forms of
  Internet use are included. The population considered is aged 16 to 74.          Unit (x1)   %                             :                :              :             :             :              :               :              :               :            7,0           8,7


                                                                                                                          1995             1996           1997          1998          1999           2000            2001           2002           2003            2004         2005
  Environment                                                                     Scale       Unit

  SI: Total greenhouse gases emissions, CO2 equivalent (1990=100)                 Unit (x1)   Tonnes       26)            136,3            173,5          198,2        203,9         197,0           200,3           187,8          207,1          216,0          239,4           :


                                                                                               kg of oil
                                                                                              equivalent
                                                                                              per EUR
                                                                                              1000
  SI: Energy intensity of the economy                                             Unit (x1)   GDP          27)            484,2            496,4          487,6         478,9        499,6           504,4           510,7          491,5          497,2          478,2         460.7p

  SI: Share of renewable energy in electricity consumption                        Unit (x1)   %            28)            41,6             43,0           38,9          38,3          30,0           25,0            19,9           26,3            25,2           30,8         26.02p


  SI: Road freight transport as a share of total inland freight transport (Modal split
  of freight transport)                                                                Unit (x1)   %            24)             93,0             93,8            93,6         94,8        94,8            94,3          95,3             95,5              94,6          95,3    95,5
                e : estimate
                f : forecast
                p : provisional
 1)             Mid-year population estimates.
 2)             Total area of the country includes the lakes surface area.
 3)             New Turkish Liras; 1 NTL (New Turkish Lira) = 1.000.000 TL (Turkish Liras).
 4)             GDP and GDP per capita data converted to EUR using the weighted import average exchange rates used in national accounts estimates by TURKSTAT.
 5)             Mid-year population figures used to calculate per capita values. For 1995-1996 population projections from 1985-1990. For 1997-1999 population count from 1997. For 2000-2005 general census of population. GDP and GDP per capita data converted to EUR
 using the weighted import average exchange rates used in national accounts estimates by TURKSTAT.
 6)             Labour productivity growth according to national accounts concepts is not available.
 7)             Unit labour cost growth according to national accounts concepts is not available.
 8)             Source: Eurostat.
 9)             National consumer price index (not strictly comparable with interim Harmonised Consumer Price Indices).
 10)            Data were originally provided in US dollars and converted to EUR using the average annual exchange rates for 1995 to 2005 published on Eurostat’s dissemination database.
 11)            Gross external debt figures are released in US dollars and converted to EUR using end of year US dollar - EUR/ECU parity.
 12)            Source of exports data: Central Bank; exports data (fob) exclude "Shuttle Trade and Other Goods".
 13)            Average of monthly data.
 14)            Average of monthly data; lending to enterprises more than one year.
 15)            Average of monthly data; up to one year or longer.
 16)            For the period 1995-2004 national currency refers to Turkish Liras (TL); for 2005 national currency refers to New Turkish Liras (NTL); 1 NTL (New Turkish Lira) = 1.000.000 TL (Turkish Liras).
 17)            Calculated on the basis of ISIC Rev.3, base year 2003.
 18)            Weighted annual Labour Force Survey (LFS) results, not average rates of the four quarters.
 19)            Weighted annual Labour Force Survey (LFS) results, not average rates of the four quarters. Services defined as NACE Sections G to Q.
 20)            Data for 2002, 2003 and 2004 are based on Household Budget Surveys.
 21)            Weighted annual Labour Force Survey (LFS) results, not average rates of the four quarters. Questions related with "training" were added into the LFS questionnaire from 2004, in order to supply comparability with the the definition of the indicator.
 22)            Data is available from Telecommunications Authority.
 23)            Data is available from Turkish State Railways.
 24)            Data is available from General Directorate of Highways.
 25)            Questions related with "training" were added into the LFS questionnaire from 2004, in order to supply comparability with the the definition of the indicator.
 26)            Total greenhouse gas emissions (CO2 equivalent) includes the direct emission gases (CO2, CH4 and N20) from the fuel combustion of sectors (electricity production, transport, industry, households and others), agriculture, enteric and industrial
 processes/production, mining and waste disposal and total CO2 removals includes only agricultural soil. The data include HFCs emissions starting from the year of 2000 and SF6 emissions from the year of 1996
 27)            Source: Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources.
 28)            Source: Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources; prices represent average prices for the year.




EN                                                                                                                                    81                                                                                                                                        EN

